
1. PERFECT CALC Programs:  four main program files:

pc.com            The main command file of Perfect Calc. (Perfect
                  Calc.COMpiled)

pc.ovl            An 'overlay' file which 'overlays' Perfect Calc
                  command routines back and forth between machine
                  memory and disk storage.  (Perfect Calc.OVerLay)

pc.swp            A program file holding disk storage space for those
                  portions of your spreadsheet files which cannot be
                  held in machine memory.  (Perfect Calc.SWaP)

pcconfig.com      A configuration program for installing Perfect Calc.
		  (Perfect Calc.CONFIGuration.COMpiled)

Note: Unlike Perfect Writer, Perfect Calc does not need to be configured
to your printer, since it uses the standard CP/M printer definition. 
However, you may wish to use this configuration program to customize
printer output--i.e.  changing pitch or page widths (See Appendix 'A' of
the Perfect Calc User's Guide). 

     The only modification you will need to make to the Perfect Calc
Program disc is to install your CP/M disk operating system on it,
using the 'SYSGEN' utility provided on your CP/M disc.  This will
allow it to 'boot up' or 'cold start' your computer.  The procedure
for doing this is described in your Kaypro User's Guide, and the
disk-based lesson 'B:KAYPRO.LRN'.

     Like Perfect Writer, the Perfect Calc Program disc should be
inserted in drive 'A' and a blank disc to hold the spreadsheet
files you will create in drive 'B'. As always, the disc in drive
'B' must be separately 'initialized' by transferring to that drive and
typing 'Control--C'.


2. Perfect Calc Lessons 

     The Lessons disc contains eight sequential and interconnected
lessons, which will acquaint you with the command routines used by
Perfect Calc. Since many of these commands follow Perfect Writer, they
will be familiar to you already.  To use these lessons:

  -  Place the Lessons disc in drive 'B' and the Perfect Calc
     Program disc in drive 'A'.

  -  Transfer, or 'log', to drive 'B' and initialize the Lessons
    disc. That is, type:

		   A>b: <cr> (logs you to drive 'B')

  -  Type:

		 B>A:pc b:teachme.pc  <carriage return>

     The first lesson of Perfect Calc will be displayed on the
screen.  From then on, instructions will be provided to guide you
through the remaining lessons. 



3. Sample Spreadsheets

     The Lessons disc also contains a number of 'application
packages', i.e.  preconfigured, sample spreadsheets which demonstrate
the variety of ways you can use Perfect Calc. These sample
spreadsheets are intended as examples only, and before using any of
them you may wish to verify their correctness and suitability for your
particular needs.  Instructions for accessing each of these
spreadsheets is provided in the Perfect Calc User's Guide.


            Perfect Software, Product Science Center, 1982











