                                    DDraw
                            copyright (c) 1984 by
                                 D. Griffith

   DDraw is a general purpose graphics/text utility designed for Kaypro'84
models.  DDraw can be described as a 'McPaint' for the Kaypro.  I want to
say that DDraw (and this documentation) is not nearly in its final form,
so please do not compare it unfavorably to some of the drawing programs
available for more graphicly oriented systems.

   The source to DDraw will be released (probably) into the public domain
as soon as I feel it is complete.  Any suggestions for features, improvements,
etc., can be directed to:
               D. Griffith
               912 Terra Mar Dr.
               Tampa, Fla.,  33612
or a message can be sent via modem on the Pro-Com 1 or 2 systems
(813) 937-3608, (813) 937-6829.


Drawing

   To draw something, simply type DDRAW at the CP/M prompt and press <RETURN>.
The screen will clear and a graphic cursor will appear.  Typing a '?' or 'H'
for help will bring up a menu of commands.
   The numbers 1-9, not including 5, move the cursor in the direction
relative to the 5 on the keypad.  The 5 will toggle draw/erase mode.  If you
wish to position the cursor without drawing or erasing, press the B key to
enter Browse mode, move the cursor as though you were drawing, then press
B again to leave browse mode.
   To avoid having to hold down keys to move the cursor, a Repeat mode was
added.  By pressing the R key, all movement commands automatically repeat
until either a key is pressed or the edge of the screen is reached (in non-
wrap-around mode).  Pressing R again puts the cursor back into a manual
repeat mode.
   The cursor will default to stopping when the edge of the screen is reached.
This can be changed by pressing the W key (to stop or start).  At that time,
when the edge is reached, the cursor wraps around to the opposite side.
   The screen can be entirely cleared by pressing ^C (hold down the CTRL key
at the edge of the keyboard and press the C).  If the screen was not saved,
it is lost.
   Two features that make drawing a little easier is a line and circle drawing
command.  To draw a line, move the cursor to one end of the proposed line,
press the L key, move the cursor to the other end and press L again.  To draw
a circle, move the cursor to the center of the proposed circle, press the C,
move to a point on the edge and press C again.  Either command may be aborted
before it is drawn by pressing the space bar before pressing the command key
the second time.  Note that if you are in erase mode, a line or circle is
erased at the indicated positions.
   Another useful feature is the status line.  By pressing the S key, a
status line indicating the cursor position will appear at the lower left
of the screen.  The first Y and X is a character position that can be used
in programs.  The second set, gY and gX are a graphics position that ranges
from 0-99 for gY and 0-159 for gX.
   Yet another useful feature is the Text entry command.  By pressing the
letter T while in graphics mode, a letter-size cursor appears at the same
(approximate) position of the graphics cursor.  At this time, typing of
text is allowed.  The arrow keys (set up for WordStar or Kaypro) will move
the cursor around th screen.  The RETURN key will move the cursor to the
beginning of the next line.  To exit the text entry mode, press the ESCape
key.  Text (but not spaces) will overwrite graphics.  This is not to say
that any graphics you type over are lost;  it is just that the text has
priority.  By typing spaces over text, any covered graphics will appear.
  One last command.  ^U (hold down the CTRL key and press U) will refresh
the screen.  This is used whenever you have typed in the 80th column of
the 24th line (the screen scrolls automatically) or when spaces have been
typed over text to reveal covered graphics (they do not appear immediately).


Subpictures

   It is often convenient to save a portion of a disply in a buffer and
redisplay it at a different position.  The subpicture commands allow this.
I admit the commands are hardly mnemonic of their function, but I did not
want to use multiple control codes at the time.  That will probably change
in later versions for ease of use.  Regardless, the subpicture entry procedure
is: move the cursor to the upper left corner of the block you wish to save,
type ^B (hold CTRL key and press the letter B) begins subpicture entry.
Follow it immediately my the number 0, 1, or 2 to tell which buffer you wish
the image stored.  Move the cursor to the lower right corner and press ^B
again.  The image will be stored.  You may now continue with any editing.
   To recall an entered subpicture simply move the cursor to the upper left
corner of where you wish it displayed and type ^R followed by the number 0,
1, or 2 depending on which picture you wish displayed.
   At the present time, the subpicture commands actually save a from the
current character position (the YX in the status line) not the graphic
cursor position (gYgX).  This means that usually a little more will be
stored and that the display may not start at precisely where the cursor is
when the ^R command is entered.  That will be remedied soon.
   Subpictures may be saved to disk for use in a later session by
typing ^D and entering a filename.  To reload a set, press the letter D
and enter the filename you wish to restore.  Note that executing a clear
screen command (^C) does not destroy the subpictures stored in memory.
   A final note on redisplaying the subpictures:  if the cursor is in erase
mode, the subpicture will overwrite whatever is 'under' it.  If the cursor
is not in erase mode, the subpicture will me 'merged' with the graphics.
Either way, any text will be overwritten and a screen refresh (^U) command
should be issued.


Printing

   Two methods are provided for displaying screen images on the printer.
The first is solely for graphics.  It prints (on a Gemini/Epson printer)
a bit image of the graphic screen.  To produce this print, type ^P.  The
other print will also copy any text to the printer.  I know it works on
the Gemini printers (not so sure about Epson).  The command is ^O.


Saving and Loading Screens

   To save a screen (graphics and text), type ^S followed by a filename.
If the disk is read only, full, or the directory is full, an error will
occur and the screen will be lost.  To load a screen, type ^L followed
by the filename.  If the file does not exist, an error will occur.
Provisions will be made in a revision to allow separate saving of text
and graphics screens.  This will allow text screens to be produced by
other methods (word processors) then merged into the graphic screens.


Miscellaneous

   A final command ^Q will exit DDraw without saving screens.
If when asked for a filename (loading and saving), you wish to abort the
command, simply press RETURN without entering anything.


Note

   I believe I have covered all of the commands available as of
December 1984.


                      DDRAW.COM

The file DDRAW.COM was compiled by Turbo v2.0 with an
ending address of B000h.  This should allow it to run
on anything with a 64k (to start) CP/M 2.2 system.

It compiled and runs fine on my KP10 with a very crowded
high memory area (ZCPR3, screen dumper, etc.) and a 51k
TPA.

As Dan states in the DOC, this program is not finished yet.
He has a planned improved pattern fill routine and a few
other things to do (make it work with a printer other then
a Gemini/Epson I hope...)


		Steve Sanders (Sysop)
		DataCOM Network RCP/M #1 & #2
		(813) 937-3608  300/1200