
Option 1 -- Quiet mode.  "YES" causes CRLZH and UNCRLZH to default to quiet 
mode, with only the filenames displayed as the file is uncompressed.  The Q 
command line option toggles the default mode chosen here.

Option 2 -- Include System files.  "NO" causes CRLZH and UNCRLZH to filter 
out system (hidden) files as it reads the directory.  If "YES" is selected, 
system files will be included.  The default can be toggled with the S 
command line option.

Option 3 -- Overwrite without prompt.  "YES" causes existing files with the 
same name in the destination directory to be erased and overwritten without 
notice by CRLZH and UNCRLZH.  If "NO" is chosen, you will be prompted 
before files are erased.  The E command line option toggles the default.

Option 4 -- Bigger File.  "NO" will cause CRLZH to ask "Result file larger 
than original, keep it anyway?".  If "YES" is selected, the question will 
not be asked and the resulting file will always be kept.  This question is 
asked only when the source and destination directories are the same.  This 
configuration option has no effect on UNCRLZH.

Option 5 -- Inspect (Tag) mode.  "YES" causes CRLZH and UNCRLZH to default 
to Tag mode.  The default is toggled by the I and T command line options.

Option 6 -- Archive mode.  "YES" causes CRLZH to default to Archive 
"backup" mode.  The default can be toggled by the A command line option.  
This configuration option has no effect on UNCRLZH.

Option 7 -- Warm boot.  "NO" is the correct selection in most cases.  "YES" 
causes a warm boot each time CRLZH and UNCRLZH exit to the operating 
system, and is included for systems which do not allow the CCP to remain 
resident.

Option 8 -- Turbo-DOS.  "YES" turns off multi-sector disk I/O for CP/M 3.0- 
compatible systems, like TurboDOS, which don't support that method.  Multi- 
sector I/O is never used under CP/M 2.2, so this configuration option is 
not significant.

Option D -- Maximum drive and user allowed.  This configuration option is 
only effective under vanilla CP/M systems and for user areas under 15.  
User areas above 15 cannot be accessed when CRLZH and UNCRLZH are run under 
CP/M.  Under ZCPR3 all 32 user areas are available and the CPR is used to 
parse the file specifications, so this option has no effect.   If you wish, 
you can enter a DU specification here, which will become the maximum drive 
and user available under CP/M.

Option T -- Default filetype.  This UNCRLZH option is used only when files 
are uncompressed to and from the same drive and user.  In that case a 
wildcard filetype ("*") will default to files with the character entered 
here as the middle character of their filetype.  Normally, for LZH encoded 
files this option should be "Y".  If you use UNCR more often to decompress 
squeezed or CRUNCHED files, enter "Q" or "Z".  This option is not used by 
CRLZH.


                          FILETYPE EXCLUSION LIST
                             (For CRLZH only)

You may enter up to 10 three-letter filetypes to be ignored by CRLZH.  When 
these filetypes are encountered, no attempt will be made to compress the 
files unless they are explicitly specified on the command line.  Instead 
they will be copied (if the destination is a different directory) or 
ignored (if the source and destination directories are the same).  The 
defaults already installed are "ARC", "ARK", "LBR", and "FOR".

It is not necessary to add ?Z? or ?Q? to the list because CRUNCH will 
recognize squeezed and crunched files automatically by reading their 
headers.

All the filetypes must be filled in.  To eliminate a filetype from the 
list, simply overwrite it with a repeat of one of the others, such as 
"ARK", that you don't want crunched.

UNCRLZH does not use this exclusion list.
