There are three ways to use HELP:!

1.  You may press the "?" key at any time during your work. The help
text that appears will apply to the command you were using when
you pressed "?". When you resume (by pressing "R"), your work will
be exactly as you left it.

2.  You may view information on special topics right now by selecting
one of the topics listed at the bottom of the screen. Type the
first letter of the desired word.

3.  You may familiarize yourself with all the available information by 
paging through the help text right now. Select "Next" (press "N")
"Previous" or "Start" page. If you need information on a specific
command, highlight the command name on the proper menu (using the space
bar) and press "?".

Applications

The following table provides an index to the commands and help
topics which apply to common questions.

If you need to:                            You should consult:
enter data:                                Value, Lock, Help
Keyboard enter text:                       Alpha
use menus:                                 Help Commands 
enter arguments to commands:               Help Editing
edit text or formulas:                     Help Editing, Edit,%
Alpha do calculations:                     Help Formulas 
use mathematical or financial  functions:  Help Formulas
move through the sheet:                    Help Commands, Goto
create headings:                           Format (Continuous)
Window Split Titles use data in inactive sheets:  Xternal
define or delete names for cells:          Names
use names:                                 Help Formulas 
change the format of numbers:              Format
re-arrange sheet contents:                 Copy, Delete,
Insert, Move replicate data or formulas:   Copy
clear the sheet:                           Transfer Clear
save and load files:                       Transfer
show file directory:                       Transfer Load
increase speed:                            Option recalc 
alphabetize:                               Sort

EDITING
The editing commands give you an easy way to use what is already on the
screen, so you do less typing. You can use the editing commands any time
you are entering or changing values, text, or formulas.

If you need to:                     Here is what you do:
Delete proposed response:           Just type the replacement.
                                    Multiplan will automatically 
                                    delete the proposed response.
Append to proposed response:        To expand proposed cell references, 
                                    just type a colon (:) or other
                                    operator; in other instances press
                                    the Character or Word Right key 
                                    and type the rest of the text.
Insert new text:                    Type the text. It will be inserted in
                                    front of the highlighted cursor.
                                    Move the cursor if necessary before
                                    typing.
Delete some text:                   Use backspace to delete in front of
                                    the cursor. Use the delete key to
                                    delete what is highlighted.
                                    Move the highlight as necessary before
                                    deletion.
Replace some text:                  Just delete the old text and type.
Move highlight:                     Use Character/Word Left/Right keys (see
                                    under Keyboard).
                                    
FORMULAS
Formulas are recipes for producing values. The table of functions
that may be used in formulas is shown below. Other parts of formulas
are described following the table. The following functions operate on a
set of values either given as arguments or contained in areas
referenced by the arguments:

AND(list)   Returns True if (and only if) all values are True,
            otherwise returns False.
AVERAGE(list) = SUM(list)/COUNT(list).
COUNT(list) number of values that are given explicitly or by
            reference.
MAX(list)   largest of the values.
MIN(list)   smallest of the values.
NPV(d,list) Returns the Net Present Value of the cash flows
            represented by the values. The first
            parameter d is the discount rate.
OR(list)    Returns True if (and only if) any argument values are
            True, otherwise returns False.
STDEV(list) sample standard deviation of the values.
SUM(list)   sum of the values.

The other functions have fixed arguments as shown:
ABS(n)      absolute value of the number n.
ATAN(n)     arctangent of n in radians.
COS(n)      cosine of the angle n given in radians.
COLUMN()    current column number.
DOLLAR(n)   the text string showing the value n in $ format.
EXP(n)      e to the power n.
FALSE()     the logical value False.
FIXED(n,m)  the text containing n in Fix format with m decimals.
            m=0 is the same as Int format.
IF(f,a,b)   Returns a if f is True, otherwise returns b.
INDEX(vector,n) Returns the nth element in the vector.
INDEX(area,n,m) Returns the value in the nth row and mth column
            of the rectangular area.
INT(n)      the largest integer that is less than or equal to n.
ISERROR(n)  Returns True if (and only if) n is an error value.
ISNA(n)     Returns True if (and only if) n is an #N/A value.
LEN(t)      the length of the text t in characters.
LN(n)       the base e logarithm of n.
LOG10(n)    the base 10 logarithm of n.
LOOKUP(n,area) works as follows: If the area is higher than 
            wide, n will be looked up in the first column of
            the area. If n is less than the first cell in the 
            first row, #N/A is returned. Otherwise Multiplan scans
            for the row that in the first column contains the 
            greatest number less or equal to n. The result is 
            the value in the last column of the same row. For 
            areas wider than high, rows and columns are interchanged.
MID(t,n,m)  starting at position n, take m characters of the
            text value t.
MOD(n,m)    the remainder of the integer division n/m.
NA()        returns the #N/A (not available) value.
NOT(f)      the opposite of the True/False flag f.
PI()        the value of pi. (3.1416...)
REPT(t,n)   the text t repeated n times.
ROUND(n,m)  n rounded to m decimal places.
ROW()       the current row number.
SIGN(n)     Returns -1 if n<0, 0 if n=0, 1 otherwise.
SIN(n)      the sine of the angle n specified in radians.
SQRT(n)     the square root of n.
TAN(n)      the tangent of the angle n.
TRUE()      the logical value True.
VALUE(t)    The text t must contain the representation of a numeric
            constant. The value of that constant is returned.

Formulas are made by combining values (text and numbers) and references to
other cells with the usual arithmetic operations and other functions.
Numeric values are stored with 14 digits of precision (mantissa) and
a decimal exponent ranging from -64 to +62. Numeric constants may be
typed as integers (123), decimal fractions (123.001), or in exponential
notation (123.001E3). The exponent sign (E) may be typed in upper or
lower case. Percentages may be typed in, followed by percent sign (12%).
Text-valued constants are enclosed in double quotes (the constants may 
not themselves contain quotes).

Multiplan may produce error values that will propagate through the
operations. These are:
#N/A    not available: a special value that may be created using the
        NA() function and that will be propagated by arithmetic
        operations.
#NAME?  result of an undefined name reference.
#NUM!   result of overflow or illegal use of arithmetic function
        e.g. sqrt(-1).
#DIV/0! result of an attempt to divide by 0.
#REF!   relative reference reaching outside the sheet or reference
        to a deleted area.
#NULL!  intersection of disjoint areas, e.g. R1 R2.
#VALUE! use of text value where a number is needed or vice versa.
        Use of references in illegal contexts when a value is
        needed.
        
Absolute references are special names that incorporate absolute row and/or
column numbers and that are used to refer to particular cells or groups
of cells. A reference may be used to get the value from the referenced
cell. Absolute references may be entered simply by using direction keys
followed by the Reference key (@). RnCm (e.g., R2C3) refers to a single cell.

Rn      refers to all of row n.
Cn      refers to all of column n.
Rn:m    refers to rows n through m (short for Rn:Rm.)
Cn:m    refers to columns n through m (short for Cn:Cm.)

Relative references are measured from the cell containing the formula. 
They can be entered using the direction keys. The forms are:

R[-n], R[+n] are the nth row above and below the active cell.
C[-n], C[+n] are the nth column left and right of the active cell.
             (the + sign may be omitted)
R       is the row containing the active cell (i.e., R[0]).
C       is the column containing the active cell (i.e., C[0]).
        and combinations of the above, e.g. R[-2]C.

Names may be defined to be any absolute reference (with the Name command).
A name may be used anywhere an absolute reference can be used. Names
must start with a letter and may contain letters, digits, periods, and
underline characters. They may be entered by pressing the Reference key
(@) and stepping through the list of defined names using the directional
keys. The operators in formulas are:

+       arithmetic addition
-       subtraction
*       multiplication
/       division
^       exponentiation. Calculated by%

the rule: a^b = exp(ln(a)*b) for exponents that are not
integral numbers.

%       percent, same as /100
&       text string concatenation. The formula "$"&"1.00" will yield: "$1.00".
<, <=, =, >=, >, <> are comparison operators: less, less or equal, equal, 
        greater or equal, greater, and not equal. To be used for comparing
        numbers only.
        
The operators require single values as operands.  If presented with a
vector (a rectangular collection of cells of width or height =1), it 
will be automatically intersected by the current row or column, whichever
is perpendicular to the vector, to obtain a single value.

The following three operators operate on groups (sets) of cells:

(space) intersection of two areas, the collection of cells that
        belong to both operands.
,       union of the two areas; cells that belong to either operand.
:       range operator:  the smallest rectangular collection of
        cells that includes all cells in either operand.
        For example, R1C1:R2C2 is the rectangle with R1C1 as its
        upper left corner and R2C2 as its lower right corner.

COMMAND OVERVIEW
The Multiplan worksheet consists of a grid of up to 63 columns in width,
and 255 rows in length. The screen has one or more "windows" into
the worksheet, and an area showing command, message, and status lines.
The message line suggests the action to be taken or explains errors
when they occur. The status line displays coordinates of the active
cell, its contents, percentage of storage remaining, and worksheet name.
There is a highlighted "active cell" on the worksheet. The highlight can 
be moved around by pressing the direction keys. The same keys are also
used for scrolling the contents of windows. The Home key may be used to
go to row 1 column 1 quickly.

The command menu offers a choice of commands. To get going, you need to:
1.      Select an active cell. The direction keys may be used. The
        same keys also scroll the worksheet in the window.
2.      Select a command. There are two ways to do this. You can
        move the highlight to a command word using the space
        or backspace keys and then press RETURN. Or, type the
        first letter of the command word.
        A new and more specific command menu or the parameter
        fields with the proposed responses will be displayed.
3.      Specify the parameters of the command. The TAB key may be
        used to move from field to field. See "Editing" for other
        useful tips.
4.      You may use the Cancel key at any time to return to the main menu.
5.      Press RETURN. The command is now carried out.
        Press "?" for additional information.
         
ALPHA
Used to enter or edit alpha text terminated by RETURN. An empty
string of characters may not be entered with this command.

ALPHA/VALUE
If an Alpha or Value command is terminated with a direction key
or any other key that moves the cursor, Multiplan will respond
with ALPHA/VALUE, ready to accept another alpha or value entry. The
first character typed will determine the type of entry. The
characters 0 through 9, =, +, -, (, and " select VALUE; all
other characters select ALPHA. This process may be repeated to enter a
sequence of text or values. If the text is too long, an error
message will result. Note also that double quotes may not be used in text
strings.

BLANK
Blanks out contents of specified cell(s).
The parameter must describe an area of the sheet. When an error message
occurs, check to see that all names have been defined and also check the
of parentheses and operators.  For more information about the use of
parentheses and operators select "Formulas" (F) on the Help Menu. 

COPY
Replicates cell contents into other cells. A variety of sources and
destinations is provided. The from: and to: area must have 
compatible shape.

COPY FROM
Copies contents and format of a cell or group of cells to another location.
Parameters are:
1.  Description of a cell or the group of cells to be copied.
2.  Area to be filled with single source cell, or upper left cell
    where the source group should be copied. Copy from a source into a
    similarly shaped target area is also permitted.
    
COPY RIGHT
Used to make a row of identical values or formulas.  Parameters are:
1.  Number of copies to be made to the right of the "source".
    Total number of identical cells will be this number +1 (the original).
2.  This parameter (the "source" of copying), is usually left as the 
    active cell which is the proposed response. A vertical group
    ("vector") may be copied instead to create a matrix.
    
COPY DOWN
Used to fill a column with identical values or formulas.  Parameters are:
1.  Number of copies to be made below the "source".
2.  This is the source of the copy, usually left as the active cell
    which is the proposed response. A horizontal group ("vector")
    may be copied instead to form a matrix.

DELETE
Deletes all or parts of rows or columns. Space is closed up, hence
cells to the right of or below the deleted area will move.

DELETE ROWS
Deletes all or part of row(s); space will be closed up; formulas, names
and references are adjusted. To delete the active row, just press RETURN.
Effects of deletions on references and formulas, as well as on
structures of rows and columns, must be carefully considered.
The parameters are:
1.  Number of rows to be deleted 
2.  First row to be deleted
3.4.These two parameters are usually left as proposed. They may be used
    to limit the deletion to a range of columns. Cells below the
    range will move up to occupy the deleted space.

DELETE COLUMNS
Deletes all or part of column(s); space will be closed up; formulas,
names, and references are adjusted. Parameters are:
1.  Number of columns to be deleted
2.  First column to be deleted
3.4.These two parameters are usually left as proposed. They may be
    used to limit the deletion to a range of rows. Cells to the
    right of the range will move left to occupy the deleted space.
    
EDIT
Puts contents of active cell on command line for editing. Edited
value is reassigned to cell when RETURN is pressed.
When editing formulas, check carefully before pressing RETURN.
Use the Alpha command to edit text. Press "E" now to see section on
Editing.

FORMAT
Presents four options for formatting cells as described below:

FORMAT DEFAULT CELLS
Used to change the format for all cells that have the "Def"
property. The desired format (as well as alignment) is described
under the Format Cells command below. 

FORMAT CELLS
Sets a specific format and alignment for one or more cells. Just
typing "FC" shows the properties of the active cell. Parameters are:
1.  Cell or group of cells to be formatted.
2.  Alignment. Choices are: 
    Def     Aligns as specified in the Format Default command.
    Ctr     Centers cell entries
    Gen     (General) Aligns text left, numbers right.
    Left    Aligns cell entries to the left.
    Right   Aligns cell entries to the right.
    -       Do not change alignment. 
3.  Format. Choices are:
    Def     Format as specified in the
    Format Default command.
    Cont    Continues long text across  column border, if next cell
            empty and also formatted "Cont".
    Exp     (Scientific notation) Displays numbers as a decimal times a
            power of ten. Number of digits as specified in "# of decimals.
    Fix     Rounds to and displays number of decimals specified
            in "# of decimals" field.
    Gen     (General) Displays numbers in the most appropriate form
            considering the size of the cell and of the number.
    Int     Numbers will be shown as integers after rounding.
    $       Displays numbers with leading dollar sign and 2 decimal
            places (negative numbers enclosed in parentheses).
    *       (Bar Graph) Displays as many asterisks as the value of the
            number.
    %       (percent) Displays the number times 100 followed by a percent sign.
    -       Do not change format.
4.  Number of decimals. This is used in the Exp, Fix and % formats above.

FORMAT WIDTH
Sets width (3 to 32 characters) for specified column(s). Multiplan's 
initial default width is 10 characters. Text (words) are cut off at edge of
column, but cell content is preserved. Widen column to display entire text, or
use Format Cells (Continuous format) to run text into next column.
Numbers too wide to be displayed are indicated by # signs. Widen 
column(s) to display entire number. Parameters are:
1.  Width of column in characters. A "D" will cause the columns to
    use the "default width" (See Format Default width).
2.3.Range of columns to be changed. 

FORMAT DEFAULT
Used to set formatting for cells with "Default" formatting, width
for columns that have "Default" width, and for other formatting options.

FORMAT DEFAULT WIDTH
Used to change the width of columns that have "Default" width.
Initially all columns have "Default" width.

FORMAT OPTIONS
"comma" option: when selected, numbers will be displayed with
commas separating every third digit before the decimal point. This affects 
only fixed, integer, percent and dollar formats.
"formulas" option: the formulas themselves will be shown, not
the numerical values of the formulas. All field widths
will be automatically doubled to accommodate the formulas
when this option is turned on.

GOTO
Used to move cell pointer over sheet.

GOTO ROW-COL
Moves cell pointer directly to specified row and column. If cell
requested is already visible, window is not moved.
Otherwise window is shifted to the specified cell.

GOTO NAME
Moves cell pointer directly to the upper left corner of named area. 
The direction keys may be used to step through the directory of names.

GOTO WINDOW
Moves worksheet so that the active cell is at the upper left corner
of the designated window.

INSERT
Used to insert new blank cells into the sheet. Existing cells may be
moved to make room for the new cells.

INSERT ROW
Inserts entire blank rows across the sheet, or portions of rows between
specified columns. Rows below added row(s) are moved down. References
affected by insertions are adjusted. Name definitions are adjusted
accordingly. Parameters are:
1.  Number of new blank rows to be inserted.
2.  The new space will be inserted before the contents of this row. 
3.4.These parameters are usually left with the proposed values.
    They may be used to limit the insertion to between the specified columns.
    
INSERT COLUMN
Inserts entire columns in the sheet, or partial columns between specified
rows. Columns to the right of the space inserted move right. References
affected by insertions are adjusted. Name definitions are adjusted
accordingly. Parameters are:
1.  Number of new blank columns to be created.
2.  The new space will be inserted to the left of the contents of this column.
3.4.These parameters are usually left with the proposed values.
    They may be used to limit the insertion to between the specified rows.
    
LOCK
Used to protect specified cell contents and formulas from
unintentional change by other commands. The Lock Cells command
can also unlock cells. In a worksheet the next unlocked 
non-blank cell can be easily located by a special key (see
Keyboard). Note that values imported from external
sheets may be unlocked only by the eXternal Copy command.

LOCK CELLS
Used to protect specific cells from unintentional change. Parameters are:
1.  Cell or group of cells to be locked (unlocked).
2.  Shows current state (Locked or Unlocked) of current cell. Use to
    specify desired state.
    
LOCK FORMULAS
If confirmed, all cells in the sheet that contain text or formulas will
be locked. This may be a convenient first step in creating a locked
sheet. You may, however, wish to leave certain text strings unlocked
or lock some important numbers.

MOVE
Used to move whole rows or columns from one place to another.

MOVE ROW
Moves whole rows from one place to another in the sheet. References 
affected by the move are adjusted, as are definitions of names.
Parameters are:
1.  First row to be moved.
2.  Moved rows will appear in front of the contents of this row.
3.  Number of consecutive rows to be moved.

MOVE COLUMN
Moves whole columns from one place to another in the sheet. References 
affected by the move are adjusted, as are definitions of names.
Parameters are:
1.  First column to be moved.
2.  Moved columns will appear to the left of the contents of this column.
3.  Number of consecutive columns to be moved.

NAME
Used to name a cell or group of cells. The names may be used in formulas
or in other commands. The name command is also useful for inspecting
the existing definitions. The parameters are:
1.  Name to be defined. Names must start with a letter and may
    contain letters, digits, periods, and underline characters.
    To review names already defined, use directional keys (right arrow:
    next name, left arrow: previous name).
2.  Definition of the cell(s) that the name is to refer to. Absolute
    references may be entered by use of direction keys. Groups of cells
    are formed using a colon (:) for "ranges" or by using comma (,) for
    "unions".
    
OPTIONS
This command lets you turn on or off various optional features of
Multiplan. "recalc" option: controls how often formula recalculations are
performed. "Yes" causes recalculation whenever a cell is changed.
This may take some time on a busy sheet. To get quicker
response turn the option off and press the Recalc key (!)
when you desire to see up-to-date! results.
"mute" option: silences the audible alarm.
"iteration" option: when "Yes" is selected, the recalculation of
worksheets with circular references will be repeated until
a completion test (see below) is satisfied. The following special 
functions may be used in iterative worksheets:

DELTA(): returns the maximum change in the values of cells from
one iteration to another. By referring to DELTA() from the
worksheet more than once the maximum change in a particular
portion of the worksheet may be calculated.

ITERCNT(): returns #N/A during normal recalculation and the
iteration count (starting with 1) during iteration.

"completion test at" option: specifies the location of a formula
for completion test. Iteration will end when this formula
evaluates to TRUE. If the option field is empty, the formula
DELTA()<0.001 will be used.

PRINT
Used for printing of worksheets. The menu command Printer starts printing.
File prints printable output on a disk file;  Margins sets margins to
be used; and Options defines the part of the worksheet to be printed, allows
insertion of a control line at the top of the output, or prints formulas
instead of their values. Time required to print depends on size
of the sheet and the speed of the printer.
As many columns are printed across the page as will fit. Leftover columns
begin a new page. When all rows have been printed, the next set of
columns will begin on a new page. 

PRINT Printer
Starts printing on the printer.

PRINT FILE
Directs printed output to a disk file instead of a printer.
If a file of the same name exists Multiplan will ask permission to 
replace it. Output to the file will start immediately.
The parameter is the name of the file to which output is to be printed.

PRINT MARGINS
Used to set page dimensions for printed output. After the RETURN key
is pressed, Multiplan will resume the Print command for the selection of the
Printer or the File to be used. The parameters are:
1.  Left margin (in print positions.)
2.  Top margin (in print lines.) 
3.  Width of printable area on the page (in print positions.)
4.  Height of printable area on the page (in print lines.)
5.  Height of pages (in print lines.)

PRINT OPTIONS
The options allow part of a worksheet to be printed, the insertion of
a control line at the top of output, and printing of formulas instead of
their values. After RETURN, Multiplan will resume the Print command for!'
the selection of the Printer or File to be used. The options are:
1.  Description of the rectangular group of cells that is to be
    printed (if not the whole sheet.)
2.  Arbitrary text may be sent to the printer using this parameter.
3.  A printout of the formulas (instead of the values of the formulas)
    can be obtained by selecting "Yes" for the "formulas" option.
4.  The printing of row and column numbers may be requested or suppressed.

QUIT
Ends Multiplan session when confirmed. This command will not save the
active sheet. Use Transfer Save to save worksheet before using Quit.

SORT
You can sort any part of the worksheet using this command. The sort key 
may be any designated column. Rows of the worksheet will be exchanged until
the values in the Key column are in the selected order. Both text and
numeric values are allowed. Text values will be ordered before any
numerical values. Empty cells are always sorted last.
To create multi-level sorts, sort on the last key first, and proceed
backward sorting on the other keys. The parameters are:
1.  The key column number.
2.3.These parameters can restrict the sort to a range of consecutive rows.
4.  Sort order. ">" means ascending, "<" means descending values.

TRANSFER
The subcommands of TRANSFER affect the entire active worksheet or
saved worksheets.

TRANSFER LOAD
Loads a worksheet from a disk file. The parameter is the "filename" of
the file. Spell and punctuate the filename exactly as it was saved 
with Transfer Save.
The direction keys may be used to display the file directory on the screen
and then select a file by pointing. Data may be automatically copied to the
loaded sheet from other supporting sheets. See XTERNAL COPY for more 
information.
Use TRANSFER OPTIONS to specify special file formats. All
special format files will be merged into the active sheet, rather than
loaded as a whole.
The filename must conform to the general rules of the Operating System
of the machine you use. Only worksheets saved in Multiplan may be
loaded by TRANSFER LOAD.
To create new worksheets, there must be space available on the disk and
the disk must not be write-protected.

TRANSFER SAVE
Saves a copy of the current worksheet as a disk file from which it can later
be loaded with Transfer Load. The parameter is the "filename". If the
filename already exists, the message, "Overwrite existing file?"
will ask for confirmation to replace that file with the new worksheet.
See TRANSFER OPTIONS for information on special file formats.

TRANSFER CLEAR
After confirmation, the sheet is cleared. Columns are set to 10
characters wide, default format is set to General.
Sheet name is set to TEMP, with no depending or supporting sheets.

TRANSFER DELETE
Removes worksheet from file system.

TRANSFER OPTIONS
Modifies the context of the following

TRANSFER operations:
The setup argument may be used to specify the directory or disk drive
for saving and loading files. The file "mode" may be used to set the
desired file format for the following Loads and Stores. This is
important for data exchange with other programs. "Normal mode" should be
selected for all files that are not used for interchange.
"Symbolic" mode is used for loading and saving of worksheets in the
symbolic SYLK format. In "Other" mode VisiCalc (TM VisiCorp) format files may
be loaded.

Great care should be taken to distinguish files that have different
formats!

TRANSFER RENAME
Renames active sheet. Offers to update references to the sheet on supporting
and depending sheets. The parameter is the desired new name.

VALUE
Can be used to enter a value or formula in the active cell. The
command is completed when RETURN is pressed. A directional key or
any other key that moves the cursor will also terminate the value
and move to the appropriate new cell. Multiplan will respond
with ALPHA/VALUE, ready to accept another alpha or value entry.
This feature is described under the Alpha command.
The following simplifications are also available:
Numbers may be entered directly. The Value command is entered auto-
matically when the leading digit is typed.
The characters =, +, -, (, and " will also start the Value command.
At the beginning of the formula and after entering an operator, a
relative reference can be entered just by pressing the direction keys
to move the highlight to the cell to be referenced. The reference
may be changed to Absolute by pressing the Reference (@) key.

WINDOW
This command is used to control size, number, and display of "windows",
which are subdivisions of the screen.

WINDOW SPLIT HORIZONTAL
Splits active window across the screen at the row indicated. The new
window will occupy the space below the row selected, and may be
linked with the original window for synchronized scrolling in the
horizontal direction.

WINDOW SPLIT VERTICAL
Splits active window vertically at the column specified. The new window 
may be linked with original window for synchronized scrolling
in the vertical direction.

WINDOW SPLIT TITLES
Splits active window into 2 or 4 windows which scroll together.
This command is used to hold column titles or row headings in place
while cells are scrolled. Parameters are:

1.  Number of rows to become a window across the top of the screen.
2.  Number of columns to become a window at the left of the screen.

The remaining display space becomes the active window which is linked for
horizontal movement with the window above it, and for vertical movement
with the window to its left. Note that the acceptance of the
proposed parameters will split the titles so that the current cell will be
at the upper left corner of of the data area in the active window.

WINDOW BORDER
Used to border or to remove a border from a window.
Note that borders occupy one screen position on each side of the window,
thus reducing the display area by 2 screen lines and 2 screen columns.

WINDOW CLOSE
This command removes the designated window from the screen.

WINDOW LINK
This command can set or break the links for synchronized scrolling.
Parameters are:

1.2.These parameters define a pair of windows. In most cases the
proposed values are acceptable. Note that linking of windows
that are not "neighbors" is not permitted.

3.  The parameter shows the current state of linking, and may be used
to change the linking. The direction of linking follows the 
direction of window splits.

XTERNAL
This group of commands deals with references to inactive (external)
worksheets.

XTERNAL COPY
Copies data from an external sheet to the active sheet. Optionally,
a permanent link may be established between the active sheet and the 
source of the data. The Name command may be used immediately after
the copy to create a name for the target area that is related to
the name of the source ("filename.areaname".) The parameters are:

1.  External sheet name. The direction keys may be used to step through 
    names of the supporting sheets.

2.  Name of the source area to be copied on the external sheet. The
    direction keys will step through the permanently copied names from
    sheet defined by the first parameter.

3.  Target area on the active sheet. A permanent link (see below) may
    be broken by deleting the target area definition.

4.  Link option. If "No" link is selected, the copy will be carried
    out and the command will terminate. If "Yes" is selected, a permanent
    link is established as described below.

Linked copies have a number of special properties: a permanent record
of the copy parameters will be kept with the active sheet. Every time!%
the sheet is loaded, the copying will be repeated so that the most
up-to-date information on the source sheets - the "supporting" sheets -
can be imported to the active sheet. Whenever sheet relationships change,
the supporting sheets may be updated with a "receipt" showing which sheets
"depend" on them. These lists may be inspected using the XTERNAL LIST 
command described below.
The imported data will be locked on the sheets. When a cell containing
imported data is highlighted, the status line will show:
    [source sheet name  source area name]
Linking may be changed or broken only by redefining the target area
or deleting the target area definition in the XTERNAL COPY command.

XTERNAL LIST
The relationships between the active worksheet and other worksheets are displayed:
"Sheets supporting" shows sheet names and possibly a substitute name for 
worksheets which support (export data to) the active sheet "Sheets depending on" 
lists filenames of sheets which depend on (import data from) the active worksheet. 
Press any key to return to the display of the active sheet.

XTERNAL USE
Sets a substitute name for a supporting sheet using the following parameters:

1.  New sheet name to be used. This name should not be used in other 
    substitutions.

2.  Sheet name currently in use in existing links. All copies using  
    this name - whether a real sheet name or just a formal or "dummy" 
    name - will henceforth refer to the first parameter.

KEYBOARD
Below are standard keys for CP/M-80 and MP/M Multiplan.  If you have another
terminal and some of these keys don't work, see the "Keys for Other
Terminals" below and the chart of exceptions that applies to your terminal.
If your terminal has up,down,left, and right arrow keys, they move the cell
pointer.  If your terminal has a home key, it moves the cell pointer to R1C1.

MOVE THE CELL POINTER
Up Direction        CTRL-E
Down Direction      CTRL-X
Left Direction      CTRL-S
Right Direction     CTRL-D
Next Window         CTRL-W, ;
Next Unlocked Cell  CTRL-F

SCROLL THE WINDOW
Page Up          CTRL-R Up-Direction
Page Down        CTRL-R Down-Direction
Page Left        CTRL-R Left-Direction&
Page Right       CTRL-R Right-Direction
Home             CTRL-Q
End              CTRL-Z

SELECT AND EXECUTE COMMANDS
Cancel              CTRL-C
Execute command     RETURN, CRTL-M 
Select next         SPACE BAR
item on menu
Select previous     BACKSPACE, CTRL-H 
item on menu
Tab to next field   TAB, CTRL-I, CTRL-A
in command
Help                ?
Recalculate         !

EDIT CELLS AND COMMANDS
Delete              DELETE, CTRL-Y
Backspace           BACKSPACE, CTRL-H
Character Right     CTRL-L
Character Left      CTRL-K
Word Right          CTRL-P
Word Left           CTRL-O
Reference           @

KEYS FOR OTHER TERMINALS
Some keys differ from the chart above the following terminals.  See below for
exceptions that apply to your terminal.

Apple II and IIe
Apple III
TRS-80 Model II
Kaypro II
Xerox 820 and 820 model II
Vector Graphic Vector 4
Harris MFT
NorthStar ADVANTAGE
Zenith/Heath h19
Zenith Z-29
ANSI
ADM 3a/5/21/31/42
Televideo 910/912/920
Televideo 910+
Televideo 925/950/TS-802
DEC VT-100
Datavue 132/c
Soroc IQ-150

APPLE II, IIe and III
Select previous itemi on menu    CTRL-T
Character Right     CTRL-B
Character Left      CTRL-V
Backspace           CTRL-T
Special Characters (Apple II only):#
[ (left bracket)    CTRL-N
] (right bracket)   SHIFT-M
^ (exponent)        SHIFT-N
\ (back slash)      CTRL-L

XEROX 820 OR 820-II
Tab to next field   TAB, CTRL-I
in command
Cancel              ESC
Help                HELP

KAYPRO II
Cancel              ESC, CTRL-C
Select previous item on menu     CTRL-U
Character Right     CTRL-B
Character Left      CTRL-V
Backspace           CTRL-U

TRS-80 MODEL II
Next Unlocked Cell  F2
Page Up             CTRL-R + Up Arrow
Page Down           CTRL-R + Down Arrow
Page Left           CTRL-R + Left Arrow
Page Right          CTRL-R + Right
Arrow
Home                F1

VECTOR GRAPHIC VECTOR 4
Next Window        CTRL-B
Page Up            C1
Page Down          C2
Page Left          C3
Page Right         C4
End                CTRL-V

HARRIS MFT
Select previous item on menu    BACKTAB
Select next item on menu    SPACE BAR
Execute Command    ENTER
Delete             DEL
Backspace          BACKTAB
Character Right    CTRL-U
Character Left     CTRL-Y

NORTHSTAR ADVANTAGE
Up Direction   SHIFT + Up-Arrow
Down Direction SHIFT + Down-Arrow
Left Direction SHIFT + Left-Arrow
Right DirectionSHIFT + Right-Arrow
Page Up        SHIFT + Upper-Left-Arrow
Page Down      SHIFT + Lower-Left-Arrow
Page Left      SHIFT +
Lower-Right-Arrow Page Right     SHIFT +
Upper-Right-Arrow Delete         CTRL-Y
Character RightCTRL-B
Character Left CTRL-V

HEATH/ZENITH H19
Use the SHIFT key to enter numbers on the keypad.
Next Unlocked Cell  CTRL-F, LINEFEED
Character Right     DC  (keypad 9)
Character Left      IC  (keypad 7)
Word Right          DL  (keypad 3)
Word Left           IL  (keypad 1)
Reference           WHITE
Page Up             f1
Page Down           f2
Page Left           f3
Page Right          f4
End                 f5
Cancel              ERASE
Recalculate         BLUE
Help                RED

ZENITH Z-29
Use the SHIFT key to enter numbers on the keypad.
Next Unlocked Cell  CTRL-F, LINEFEED$
Character Right     DC  (keypad 9)
Character Left      IC  (keypad 7)
Word Right          DL  (keypad 3)
Word Left           IL  (keypad 1)
Reference           f7
Page Up             f1
Page Down           f2
Page Left           f3
Page Right          f4
End                 f5
Cancel              ERASE
Recalculate         f6
Help                HELP

ALL ANSI STANDARD TERMINALS
Up Direction        SHIFT +
Keypad Up-Arrow
Down Direction      SHIFT +
Keypad Down-Arrow
Left Direction      SHIFT +
Keypad Left-Arrow
Right Direction     SHIFT +
Keypad
Right-Arrow
Character Right     SHIFT + Keypad 9$$
Character Left      SHIFT + Keypad 7$$
Word Right          SHIFT + Keypad 3$$
Word Left           SHIFT + Keypad 1$
ADM-3A/5/21/31/42,

TELEVIDEO 910/912/920
Backspace           CTRL-U
Character Left      CTRL-V
Character Right     CTRL-B
TELEVIDEO 910+
Backspace           CTRL-B
Character Left      CTRL-U
Character Right     CTRL-\

TELEVIDEO 925/950/TS-802
Cancel              F1
Help                F11
Backspace           CTRL-B
Character Left      F2, CTRL-U
Character Right     F3, CTRL-J
Word Left           F4
Word Right          F5

DEC VT-100
Character Left      PF 1
Character Right     PF 2
Word Left           PF 3
Word Right          PF 4

DATAVUE 132/C
Next Window         F6
Next Unlocked Cell  F7
Page Up             F13
Page Down           F14
Page Left           F12
Page Right          F15
Cancel              esc
Help                F8
Recalculate         F10
Delete              F3
Backspace           CTRL-U
Character Right     F4
Character Left      F2
Word Right          F5
Word Left           F1
Reference           F9
SOROC IQ-150
Backspace           CTRL-U
Character Right     CTRL-B
Character Left      CTRL-V
-------
