                       HANDY
                    Version 2.00
                 Copyright 1982 by,
                 Peter C. Hawxhurst

                   DOCUMENTATION

This documentation and the HANDY System programs may 
be  freely  distributed for  noncommercial  purposes 
provided that the copyright notice is retained.

The HANDY System includes the following programs  in 
their object (.BAS), interpreted (.INT) and squeezed 
(.BQS) form:

                      HANDYSYS
                      AGGENDAS
                      DO-TODAY
                      REMINDER
                      PLANNING
                      CALENDAR
                      ACTIONPL
                      NOTEBOOK
                      FONEBOOK
                      DECISION

The  HANDY  System programs were written  in  CBASIC 
(version 2.07), and will initially be distributed in 
their interpreted form (.INT extension).  The source 
code  for  these programs will only  be  provied  on 
request  to myself or at Chicago First Osborne Group 
(CFOG) meetings, and will be in squeezed form within 
an archive (HANDY200.ARC & HANDY200.DIR).

CBASIC  is a trademark of Compiler Systems.  Osborne 
is a trademark of the Osborne Computer  Corporation. 
CP/M is a trademark of Digital Research Corporation.


                    DESCRIPTION


HANDY is a personal time management system.  It  was 
written around my particular business needs,  but no 
doubt will be of significant value to a wide variety 
of  individuals.  The system is menu  driven.  After 
initial  sign-on  a menu will be displayed  and  the 
user   will  be  prompted  to  select  a  particular 
application.  Upon exiting each application the menu 
will  reappear for further application selection  or 
return to the CP/M operating system. 

Each  application in the HANDY System has a  command 
selection menu and command input prompt on the lower 
portion of the application display. User input for a
particular application is queried and promted  below 
the command line. Input provided by the user is then 
posted  to the appropriate place on the  application 
display.

Applications  included  in the HANDY system  are  as 
follows:

     -    A  personal  appointment calendar for  the 
          display  and maintenance in one half  hour 
          increments of daily appointments.

     -    A personal TO DO LIST for the display  and 
          maintenance  of nonscheduled activities on 
          a daily basis.

     -    A reminder list of important  dates/events 
          to remember on a monthly basis.

     -    A  planning calendar for blocking out  and 
          displaying  large  portions  of  scheduled 
          time.

     -    A calendars program for displaying monthly 
          calendars a quarter of a year at a time.

     -    An action planning notebook for displaying 
          and maintaining future activity records by 
          categories.

     -    A  notebook or log for the maintaining and 
          displaying of miscellaneous notes, records 
          or whatever by category.

     -    A quick reference phone number listing.

     -    A  decision support routine  for  rational 
          decision making assistance.

A typical application's command line would appear as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------
(A)dd (C)ontinue (D)elete (E)xit (R)estart (S)can >


Some will vary according to the application type.

HANDY  is  intended to be an on line desk  companion 
for  the busy professional.  It was designed  to  be 
extremely  user  friendly so I will not go to  great 
lengths  to  describe the use of  each  application. 
More  so how to get started and how how  to  recover 
from  operation errors,  both of which are also very 
uncomplicated. 
                    LIMITATIONS


The HANDY System was written and designed for use on 
an OSBORNE 1 computer in a 52 column, 24 row format. 
The  following  should be noted about  modifications 
for other systems capable of running in CBASIC:

     print chr$(7)       rings bell

     print chr$(26)      clears the screen

     print chr$(27)      begins  escape sequences as 
                         specified below:

     +")"                initiates  half   intensity 
                         display

     +"("                ends half intensity display

     +"T"                erases  to end of line from 
                         cursor   position   without 
                         moving lower lines up

     +chr$(ypos%)+chr$(xpos%)  moves cursor  to  the 
                         screen  positions specified 
                         by  ypos% (row number)  and 
                         xpos% (column number)

     Note that on the OSBORNE 1 ypos% is the  actual 
     row  number  plus  32 and xpos% is  the  actual 
     column number plus 32.  Thus row 12,  column 26 
     (a point at the center of the screen) is 32+12, 
     32+26 (ypos%=44,xpos%=58).  In the HANDY system 
     I have handled the differance with a subroutine 
     that equates ypos% and xpos% to the actual  row 
     and  column  numbers  so in the  above  example 
     ypos%=12 and xpos%=26.

HANDY  and  CRUN2 which is necessary for  the  HANDY 
programs  to  run occupy the better portion  of  one 
diskette (single density on the OSBORNE 1) so it was 
necessary to make it a two disk system: HANDY System 
programs and CRUN2 on a program disk in drive A  and 
a  data diskette in drive B for the data files  that 
are created and used by HANDY.

SPECIAL  NOTE:  To  make HANDY a fully  useful  desk 
companion   for  myself  I  keep  a  copy  of   Mike 
Rubenstein's  fine calculator program on my drive  A 
diskette.  This  with the HANDY programs,  CRUN2 and 
the  AUTOST.COM  program  included  with  the  HANDY 
System  distribution  fills  one  OSBORNE  1  single 
density diskette. If you did not receive the program 
AUTOST.COM  in your distribution copy it  is  simple 
enough to create using the SYNONYM.COM program. With 
the HANDY program diskette in drive B and a diskette 
with SYNONYM.COM in drive A type:

     SYNONYM B:AUTOST.COM CRUN2 HANDYSYS

Certain  entries  in HANDY must be short for  screen 
formatting purposes. Error messages will appear when 
input is too long.

RETURN  or  ENTER (possibly CR or EXECUTE  on  other 
systems) must be pressed after each user input  item 
is ready.

Dates  must be entered in the form MM/DD/YYYY.  This 
means  that a date such as January 1,  1983 must  be 
entered 01/01/1983.

Only two applications permit print out of data;  the 
appointment calendar and the To Do List.

Data from dates prior to the date each time HANDY is 
started  up  is eliminated from certain data  files. 
However  there is a programed opportunity  to  print 
this data out.


               INSTALLATION & STARTUP

HANDY is basically self installing.  Place a copy of 
CRUN2.COM on the diskette with the HANDY interpreted 
files (.INT extension) on it and place this diskette 
in  drive A.  Place a blank,  formatted diskette  in 
drive B.  If the HANDY AUTOST.COM program is on  the 
HANDY diskette you can:

     -    Cold  boot the system (push RESET or start 
          with  the  system off  - insert  diskettes 
          after turning on a system that is off).

     -    Type AUTOST.

     -    Set  one of your special function keys  to 
          AUTOST   <CR>  and  press   this   special 
          function   key  and  CTRL   simultaneously 
          (OSBORNE  1  systems must be RESET   after 
          setting  special  function keys  and  cold 
          booted  in  order for  newly  set  special 
          function keys to work). I use CTRL 0.

Otherwise  simply type CRUN2 HANDYSYS.  Drive A must 
be the logged drive.

Shortly you will see CRUN2...  appear on the  screen 
after  which the screen will go black and the  HANDY 
logo will appear. You will be asked to enter today's 
date  and then be asked to verify that today is  the 
day  of  the  week and the date  specified.  If  you 
answere  yes (y) you will see your B drive light  go 
on  and shortly the HANDY SYSTEM PROGRAM  MENU  will 
appear and prompt you to select an application. That 
is all there is to it. HANDY has already created two 
files on your data diskette in drive B; APPOINTS.DAT 
and DOTHINGS.DAT. Other files are created as you use 
particular applications. The amount of various types 
of  data that can be stored on the data diskette  is 
only  limited by the amount of data your diskette is 
capable of storing.  I believe you will find this is 
quite  a bit for the HANDY System  applications  you 
use.

Keep in mind the following:

     -    Back-up your data diskettes periodically!

     -    Each time you startup the HANDY System you 
          will be asked to enter today's date.  This 
          date  is  stored  for use by  the  various 
          HANDY applications. Data on file preceding 
          this date is erased upon initialization of 
          HANDY. The first time you enter HANDY each 
          day you will be asked if you want to print 
          out  prior dates' data  (for  appointments 
          and To Do Lists only). Pay close attention 
          to the date you enter at initialization!


             RECOVERY FROM INPUT ERRORS


Generally,  HANDY will self recover from most normal 
input  errors such as input lines that are too  long 
or  erronious  dates.  In  most cases  you  will  be 
informed in a nice way that an error has occured and 
in  some  instances  particulars  about  the  error. 
However  it  is not possible to preprogram  recovery 
for every possible type of error.  For  example,  if 
you  misspell a word,  HANDY will not catch  it.  In 
case  of other not so obvious situations observe the 
following:

     -    The  easiest (but not always best) way  to 
          get  out of a sticky situation is to press 
          CTRL  and C simultaneously or press  RESET 
          to  restart  HANDY.   If  you  find   this 
          necessary,  before you restart HANDY check 
          your  data  diskette in drive B to see  if 
          there  is  a file  called  TRANS.  If  so, 
          delete this file before restarting.

     -    If  while  using a particular  application 
          you  enter a command and then decide  that 
          it is not the command you want to  execute 
          (except  for (E)xit) try pressing ESC then 
          RETURN.  I  have  preprogramed  this  into 
          HANDY  in  some  areas for  just  such  an 
          instance.

     -    If you find your back arrow does not  move 
          back  and rubout bad data input press CTRL 
          and X simultaneously.  This is a  function 
          of  how your disk is set up.  You may want 
          to  resetup your disk for arrows to be  in 
          CP/M mode instead of another mode.

It will not take much experience with HANDY to  find 
there is a minimum possibility for unnatural errors.
Every  effort  has  been made to protect  your  data 
files,  but  no guarantees are made in this  regard. 
Every  effort  has been made as well  to  keep  your 
application screens free from errors and scrolling.

I   always  like  to  recommend  that  users  become 
familiar with their data file structures by  looking 
at  them  with  their  word  processor  in  the  NON 
DOCUMENT  mode,  and with the potential of modifying 
them  on their own for particular needs.  A  typical 
line in a data file for HANDY might look as follows:

     "01/01/1982",26.2,"9:00","Peter/Meeting"

Items contained in quotation marks are  alphanumeric 
entries  (words generally).  Those that are not  are 
numeric   (numbers).   Individual  data  items   are 
separated by commas.  Why would the date or the time 
in   the  above  example  be  alphanumeric  when  it 
contains  so  many  numbers,  you  ask.  Because  it 
contains other characters besides numbers.  In HANDY 
almost every file entry is alphanumeric (enclosed in 
quotation marks),  even pure numbers.  This is a way 
of controlling input errors.  Each number entered is 
checked  to  be sure it is a  number.  If  you  were 
otherwise  asked  to  enter  a  number  and  instead 
entered a letter a system error would occur and your 
application  screen would be comprimised.  This  and 
many similar conditions should not occur in HANDY.

If  you  cannot determine HANDY file  structures  on 
your  own  for your own applications  programming  I 
will  make  this information available  on  request. 

Every  effort will be made to correct bugs found  in 
the  HANDY System and maintain it up to date in  the 
public domain.  Queries should be addressed as noted 
at the end of this documentation.
                   PROGRAM NOTES


General:  Unlike some other time management systems, 
HANDY  is  designed to handle the activities of  one 
individual,  not several unless the user uses it  in 
some other way.  It is not a task force or team time 
management  system unless applied in that way by the 
user.  It may be applied in one of these ways by the 
maintenance   of   seperate   data   diskettes   for 
particular individuals.

It is not necessary to use uppercase entries for any 
input,  including  yes (y) or no (n) entries  unless 
the  user  of  the  HANDY System  has  a  particular 
preferance (like capitalizing the first letter of  a 
name) in their own input. Also, it is only necessary 
to enter the first letter of a command which appears 
within  parenthesis,   and  this  too  need  not  be 
capitalized.

AGGENDAS

This is the personal apointment calendar program. It 
is preformated for appointments from 7:00 a.m. until 
6:30  p.m.  at half hour increments.  This cannot be 
modified without changing the source code.

Primary input is the time for an appointment and the 
name or nature of the appointment. The length of the 
appointment is not automatically displayed. Such can 
only  be done manually and is left to the wants  and 
needs  of  the  user.  I in most cases do  not  show 
appointment lengths for reasons of flexibility. Also 
entries  are not automatically wrapped to  the  next 
line.  Formatting  of entries is totally left to the 
user.  An  error message will appear if  any  single 
line entry is too long.

This  application also allows for deleting  entries, 
looking  at  the  very next  day's  appointments  by 
pressing the N command, looking well into the future 
using the F command and entering the future date and 
even  searching  for a particular entry using a  key 
word. Note that searches for entries will not appear 
in chronological order but will be displayed in  the 
order they entered.

Time entries must be in the form 0:00 like 9:30. 

The appointment calendar may be printed to a printer 
if  so desired by the user.  The format for  printed 
output is pretty much the same as the screen  format 
and  can  be  cut to size for insertion in  a  small 
notebook for log purposes if desired.
DO-TODAY

This  is the To Do List application and allows entry 
of up to nine (9) none scheduled activities one must 
try  to  perform in a day like making  a  particular 
phone call or writing a report.  Future days may  be 
planned  in  advance  and entries  may  be  deleted. 
Entries  may also be sorted in order of  importance. 
The  To  Do  List may be printed to the  printer  if 
desired.

REMINDER

This  is  a  simple application  to  quickly  remind 
oneself  of important dates and events coming up  in 
the current month like birthdays and  anniversaries. 
The  user  can scan ahead to future months one at  a 
time and return to the current month if necessary.

PLANNING

This  application  allows  blocking  out  of   large 
segments  of  time  over a month like  traveling  or 
vacation periods. Entries may be as small as one day 
but the size of verbiage is limited by the number of 
days selected and only one entry can be made for any 
given day.

The format is that of a normal monthly calendar. The 
length  of  a  particular entry is  quiried  and  is 
displayed  on the calendar according to  space  left 
from  the  entry's length in words or  letters.  The 
user  may move ahead month by month or far ahead  by 
specifying  a  particular month and year  using  the 
future (F) command.

I  should  point  out that the  future  (F)  command 
appearing  in  many of the HANDY  applications  also 
allows  going back in time by specifying a  previous 
date.  Note though that in the case of AGGENDAS  and 
DO-TODAY, no prior data is retained on file from the 
current date at start up.

I  should  also  point out that the current  day  or 
month  depending  on the HANDY application  will  be 
displayed when each application is selected and  its 
screen appears.  In the case of PLANNING,  the month 
for  the  date entered at HANDY startup will  appear 
initially when it is envoked.

One  final note about PLANNING,  this  routine  does 
save prior month's data. If it is necessary to purge 
the  data  file for this program simply go  to  some 
prior month and delete an entry using the D command.
This  will  rebuild the complete file  deleting  all 
entries prior to the current month.

CALENDAR

This  is  another very simple routine that  displays 
months on a quarterly basis.  Four monthly calendars 
are displayed on the screen; three in half intensity 
and  one in full intensity.  Initially  the  current 
month  is  displayed in full intensity at the  upper 
right corner of the screen.  In half intensity,  the 
month prior to the current month is displayed in the 
upper  left corner of the screen and the two  months 
following  the  current month are displayed  at  the 
bottom of the screen in order from left to right.

When advancing (or going back in time) the specified 
month or month beginning the next quarter takes  the 
place of the current month.

ACTIONPL

If  your  not  familiar with the concept  of  action 
planning I suggest you take a seminar on it. It is a 
very  power  tool but I cannot go  into  a  complete 
tutorial  on  it here.  However this application  is 
fairly straight forward.

In ACTIONPL there are two applications screens.  One 
displays  action planning categories.  These can  be 
months,  years,  personal  or other goals,  shopping 
lists,  projects, virtually whatever the user wants. 
Twenty-four (24) categories may be specified by  the 
user.  I  had a difficult time using all twenty-four 
and for the last three used the coming three months.

At least one category must be entered before  action 
planning  may  commence.  In order to  begin  action 
planning  the user enters the scan (S) command  then 
specifies  the category to be scanned or planned.  A 
second  screen  will appear  displaying  the  action 
plans  for the specified category and allow  further 
action planning or deletion of completed activities. 
To return to the category screen the user enters the 
restart (R) command.

Action  plans  are simply something one wants to  do 
regarding a particular thing.

NOTEBOOK

This application is very similar to ACTIONPL.  It is 
simply  intended  to be what  its  name  implies,  a 
notebook.  It  has  a category screen like  ACTIONPL 
that  allows  up  to twenty-four  categories  to  be 
entered  and notation screens for each  category.  I 
use  it as an important phone call log and a log  of 
completed activities.

FONEBOOK

This  application  is intended as a quick  reference 
phone  number  listing.  The format is a  series  of 
pages  with a double column list of names and  phone 
numbers. Names are limited to eleven (11) characters 
and numbers to twelve (12) such as 800-555-1212. The 
user  may move ahead one page at a time or  all  the 
way back to the beginning.  The number of entries is 
limited  only  by  disk space and  the  other  HANDY 
files,  but  try  to fill it up.  I have only  three 
pages or about 2K of storage so far.

DECISION

Again another very simple application to help  users 
with  prioritizing  or  decision  making.  The  user 
enters  up  to  nine (9) factors  or  considerations 
bearing on a situation and then is asked to  compare 
each  one  against  all the others in terms  of  the 
greater in importance. Once this is done the factors 
are displayed in highest to lowest order of priority 
for the user's evaluation.


                      SUMMARY

At this point there is not much more I can think  of 
to tell you about HANDY.  It has been very useful to 
me  and  I hope you will find it to be the same  for 
you.  And  it is you who will help to improve it  by 
letting me know your comments, suggestions, problems 
and experience with bugs.

Please direct responce to the HANDY System to:

                 Peter C. Hawxhurst
                 705  Bayside Court
                 Wheeling, Illinois
                       60090
                   (312) 398-6184

And...

Please enjoy the HANDY System.


P.S.  Please  remove the HANDY200.DOC file from  the 
program  diskette for HANDY and print it or save  it 
on  another diskette.  

P.C.H.


e HANDY200.DOC file from  the 
program  diskette for HANDY and print it or save  it 
on
