XREFC is copyright (c) 1980, 1986 by C.B. Falconer.  It may be freely dis-
tributed and used, but may not be sold, nor included in other packages for
sale, without the express written permission of C.B. Falconer.


XREFC is a utility program to cross-referance C programs.   As an option it
can list the source file on input.   All reserved words are ignored, as are
identifiers within comments or  strings.   The  standard  indentation  code
(dle, space+N) is expanded if present.

To execute, enter:

     B>xrefc (inputfile, listfile)

which will use the default settings, i.e. list a source file which does not
contain  line-numbers  (defined  as "the first 8 characters on  a line  are
numeric"), and not list a line-numbered source file.

"PARM" values,  in the command below, of 2 or 4 unconditionally suppress or
force source file listing respectively.  Commas, parentheses  and  brackets
are all significant, and should be used as shown.

     B>xref (inputfile, listfile) [PARM]

Note that an initial field of 8 numeric characters is always considered  to
be a line-number,  and that the 1st five of these are then used as the line
identification no. in the cross-referance.

Additional "PARM" options are:

   10  Restrict the initial characters of identifiers cross-referanced.
       This allows a cross-referance of a large program to be broken up
       into two or more portions.  XREFC will ask for the range, etc.
   20  Include all numeric values.  Very useful in uncovering anonymous
       constants that really should be named constants.
   40  Include all C reserved words (otherwise ignored)
  100  Follow include files specified by "#include filename" construct.
       '#include "filename"' and "#include <filename>" are also followed.

For multiple options use the sum.

XREFC uses lexical, NOT Ascii, character order. i.e. the collation sequence
is 0...9, AaBb...Zz and "_".   This allows  the output table to be examined
for inadverdant misentry of characters in names.   These are the ONLY char-
cters allowed in identifiers, and the first character  must not be a digit.

Input files (also included files) are searched on the default, and then the
A: drive if no drive is  specified.  "listfile" may  be  CON, LST,  or  PUN
for output to those devices, or any disk file.  No final colon is required.
If CON is the input file then input can be  entered interactively,  e.g.  a
"#include fn.ft" include command.

To use the .PCD version, replace "xrefc" by "runpcd xrefc".

C.B. Falconer, 680 Hartford Tpk., Hamden, Conn. 06517.   (203) 281-1438
e