
TOPIC:  FIND50

DATE :	01 SEPT 84

FROM :	IRV HOFF


     FIND50 locates strings of characters in a file, then displays the
entire line(s) that string was found.  It can be used with wildcards to
look through numerous files automatically, searching for a particular
combination of characters.  It is especially useful with MAST.CAT or
MAST.LST catalog programs to see what disk(s) a program might be on.
It would show how many copies of that file were available, permitting
"housecleaning" of extra programs.  It is very convenient to use when
updating newer versions of files, to erase those no longer needed that
have similar names.  It has some advantages over using a normal editor
"search" since it displays each line, rather than merely stopping each
time the combination appears.  (Some editors would not conveniently al-
low hard copy printing of "search" results.)  FIND50 can optionally make
a disk file for later printing, etc.  Using a program like LISTT with
such a disk file would then permit a paginated listing of the results,
with page numbers, date, heading, etc..

     You will likely wish to keep FIND50.COM on an archive disk, then
rename to FIND.COM on your catalog and utility disks to simplify typing
the complete name (or even remembering the current version).  Examples:

 1)	B>FIND
 2)	B>FIND ?
 3)	B>FIND HELLO.ASM
 4)	B>FIND MAST.LST MODEM
 5)	B>FIND MAST.CAT _MODEM
 6)	B>FIND MAST.CAT MOD|BYE
 7)	B>FIND *.ASM HELLO
 8)	B>FIND MAST.LST .A?M
 9)	B>FIND HELLO.DOC MDM712[N]       or [N or [n] or [n
10)	B>FIND MAST.LST MDM7 (CTL-P)     control-P to operate printer
11)	B>FIND MAST.CAT .COM >NEW.CAT
12)	B>FIND HELLO.DOC process the file >FILE.TYP[n]

 	1)  Displays a short "built in" instruction guide.
	2)  Same as 1).
	3)  Prompts for a string to find.  If string is in lower-case it
		will display lines only with the same lower-case chars.
		If string is upper-case, will show all lines having the
		string, whether upper-case or lower-case or mixed case.
	4)  Typical use of the program.  Display all lines with the
		sequential characters MODEM or modem.
	5)  Using the "_" (underline) character fakes a tab key.  Just
		those lines with "(TAB)MODEM" or "(TAB)modem" are shown.
	6)  Using the "|" (vertical bar) character permits concurrent
		search/display of several strings of characters.  In
		this case, all lines containing either MOD or BYE (or
		same strings in lower case) will be displayed.
	7)  Wildcards may be used.  In this case, the name of each file
		is printed prior to being searched.
	8)  '?' may be used as a wildcard in the search field.
	9) If [N] is included, line numbers will be added.  This is
		similar to using PIP.COM and including the [N] option,
		except the line numbers shown here are those containing
		the requested string. 
	10) Turns the printer on to make a quick hard copy of results.
		If pagination is needed/preferred, make a disk copy and
		use a normal paginating program like LISTT.
	11) A disk file can be made, using the '>' character.  (This is
		needed to isolate the string area, permitting spaces to
		be used in the string.
	12) Strings can be used with spaces between words.  Shows a disk
		file will be made, with line numbers.


GENERAL COMMENTS:
----------------
     This program is especially useful with the MAST.CAT catalog program
as it can find files where only a few characters are used.  For instance
the user knows he has some modem programs called MODEM7 or MDM7 or some-
thing, so he looks for:

		A>FIND MAST.CAT DEM7|DM7|MOD

     He may also want to find all files with .ASM, .AQM and .COM so he
can make a new disk file:
 
		A>FIND MAST.CAT .ASM|.AQM|.COM >CAT.NEW

     He could then use XCAT to make a cross-reference listing, although
it will be a small nuisance:
 
	1) Rename the existing MAST.CAT temporarily to ZMAST.CAT
	2) Rename CAT.NEW (or whatever name was used) to MAST.CAT
	3) Use the editor to put at least () for an "ignore file" at
	      the start (XCAT cannot work otherwise).
	4) Use XCAT which makes a file named MAST.LST.
	5) Rename all files involved to whatever the user prefers,
	      restoring the original MAST.CAT file.

     Adding line numbers is occasionally beneficial since it shows where
in the file that line is located.  This can be useful for finding errors
in assembly level source code that are hard to find with an editor, or
to show the conentration of certain groups of characters in a file.
	
     FIND50 may also be used with address files or large message banks,
to find all occurrences of similar names, or similar streets, or similar
cities, purchase dates, product names, etc. etc. etc.

     The ability to make a disk file (plus concurrent searching for a
variety of different strings separated by a '|' character), gives FIND50
a very powerful feature.
					- Irv Hoff
