
KUTE Aug. 1984

          From the North West Kaypro User's Group (NWKUG),  Portland,
          Ore.,  via Ryan Wilson

          This nifty article was taken from the newsletter of the NWKUG.
          It works beautifully and I wanted to share it with the KUTE
          members.  It has been modified only marginally to make certain
          points more clearly than in the original.


                       RESETTING DISKS WHILE IN PERFECT WRITER
                                from the KAPPA HACKER

          Some of you have observed that one of the advantages of
          PluPerfect Writer and other comparable add-ons for Perfect Writer
          was being able to switch disks after a "write" or BDOS error
          during a session.  Resetting disks not only allows back-ups to be
          made, but it allows files to be transfered from disk to disk
          while editing.  Unfortunately, environments cost money and take
          up precious RAM space.

          Why Perfect Writer left out a disk reset is a mystery to me:
          nothing is easier to program than the BDOS 13 call.  What I have
          below -- absolutely free -- is a patch which inserts a disk reset
          as a replacement for one of the present Perfect Writer commands.
          Here's what you do:

          1.      Look at Appendix A-43 in your PW manual and find a
          function that you are not presently using.  The example below
          uses CTRL-X, S = 'MGOSPELL' because I use a spelling checker
          other than Perfect Speller.  If you are still using Perfect
          Speller, may I suggest CTRL-X,> = 'MINDNTRG' = 'Indent Region' or
          any other obscure command available.  If you have never heard of
          these commands, that is exactly my point.  One of them won't be
          missed.

          2.      Put the PW Installation disk in DRIVE A and enter
          "type pw.sym" <CR>.  Use CTRL-S to stop the scrolling.  You will
          see columns of function names and numbers.  These numbers are the
          HEX addresses of the routines within PW.COM.  All you need to do
          is find your replaceable function and make a note of the HEX
          number.  I am using PW version 1.20 and am replacing CTRL-X,S;
          therefore I'm using "5EC9."

          3.      Next, put your CP/M disk in DRIVE A and a working copy of
          PW.COM in DRIVE B.  Go to DRIVE B as the default drive (type "B:"
          at the A> prompt).  Enter "A:DDT PW.COM" <CR>.  After some disk
          activity and some numbers, you will see the DDT prompt " - ".
          Now enter "a" plus the HEX address you want to change.  In my
          example of replacing "MGOSPELL," the command would be -a5EC9.

          You will get a response beginning with the address line (5EC9).
          You now enter the rest of the first command line below, followed
          by a <CR>.  You will get another address (5ECC) and command.  The
          list below shows the entire sequence for my example, beginning
          with 5EC9.  For your own case the assembly commands and the
          displacements will be the same, though the original address will
          depend on the command you are changing.

          5EC9  LXI  B,OOOD <CR>
          5ECC  CALL 005    <CR>
          5ECF  LXI  B,000E <CR>
          5ED2  LXI  D,0001 <CR>
          5ED5  CALL 005    <CR>
          5ED8  RET         <CR>
          5ED9  .           <CR>  (the dot is a "period")

          For safety, I ordinarily work on DRIVE B in Perfect Writer.  If
          you use DRIVE A as the default drive, change the fourth command
          line to:  LXI  D,0000

          4.      Then enter g0 at the  -  prompt.

          After you get the Warm Boot, enter:  save 137 pw.com <CR>.

          When the write to disk is finished, you will possess a Perfect
          Writer that will reset the disk system whenever you enter the
          command.  This capacity will save you hours of work someday.
          Just keep a formatted disk around in case something goes wrong
          with the primary disk.

          Address for NWKUG is:

                  NWKUG
                  PO Box II
                  Portland, Oregon  97232

          They have a dandy public domain software library including
          several games disks, lots of utilities and many JRT Pascal disks
          including tutorials.  The librarian's name is Gary Matusch.
CR>  (the dot is a "period")

          For