ATTENTION PERFECT WRITER USERS

Ever lost something in RAM because you had changed the B-disc
(and so couldn't write to it) and the A-disc was full?   It
appears this is a characteristic weakness of PW:  many other word
processors allow you to put in a new disk without checking out of
the programe and back in again.

Several Kaypro users have set their minds to this, and the
simplest way of patching it is presented by Peter Brawley of
Toronto.   

The basic CP/M of course allows us to reset disks (Warm Boot) but
PW has no command for this function.   All we have to do is pick
a command we never use, and put in its address the information
that will execute the CP/M function we need.   Then whenever we
key the selected command, it will reset the disks for us, without
our needing to exit the programme.

Brawley has provided various ways of doing this in the KUTE disc
library, including a fast and automatic change using ZCPR
(upgraded CP/M) software.   The following procedure can be
carried out by anyone with standard Kaypro software.

	NB  This procedure is specifically for with version 1.20
	of Perfect Writer (though nearly similar methods should
	work with any.)

The command chosen for the Disk Reset is Ctrl-X S (since the
Perfect Speller is used by next to no one and its command will
not be missed by anyone with The Word Plus.

Proceed as follows:

;	Get DDT.COM, PWRESET.HEX and PW.COM on one disk;
;
;	Key Ctrl-C, and then these commands:
;
;		ddt
;		f100,9000,0
;		ipw.com
;		r
;		f5ec9,5fc4,0
;		ipwreset.hex
;		r
;		g0
;		save 137 pw.com
;
;	Be sure to test your patch before you copy
;	PW.COM back to your Perfect Writer disk.

And it works!   You get going in PW, switch discs in the B-drive,
key Ctrl-X S, there is the brief buzz of the drives turning, and
the magic word Reset appears at the bottom of the screen.   You
can now write whatever is in RAM (and the Swap file) onto the new
disc.   Marvellous!

Inventor Brawley added his personal joke to the patch--to silence
Kaypro keyboard click, which he dislikes.   A disk reset will
also kill the click--until the next time the bell rings (for an
Unknown command).

Just one other thing to keep in mind, if you write in both Kaypro
II (SS,DD) and Kaypro 4 (DS,DD) formats:  be sure that the new
disc you insert before Ctrl-X S is similar to the old one--or
else its CP/M track will be spoiled by SS and DS formats being
overlaid.   See our FORMAT.DOC for reasons.

[Notes by Don Phillipson, 14 Jan. 1985]w.co