		 HP PROGRAMMABLE HAND CALCULATOR

			       by
			Frank H. Levinson

	This program allows any CP/M system which has a console
that has clear screen and cursor addressing to emulate the better
part of a HP-15 programmable hand calculator.  It has
approximately 45 functions as well as limited programmability. 
One of the most interesting features of the program is that the
entire workings of the calculator can be viewed as they happen.
This feature of being able to watch it work also forms the
program's greatest limitation in that the screen is now quite
full of information and can hold little more.  The best way to
learn how to use the program is to invoke the included help
screens by typing help.  This gives a rather full explanation of
how to use the various functions.

	The program is written in SBASIC and the source is also 
included.  It is of course possible to add or delete any of the
functions by simply adding to the case statement, help section,
and functions list.  The programming section is again only limited
by the fact that I tried to make it all fit on the screen.  Many
more program statements are possible by expanding the arrays and
reworking the screen routines.  

	In order to make the program as general as possible it
was necessary to have a TERM.DEF file which will accept certain
critical terminal specific definitions: clear screen and cursor 
positioning sequences.  This is my first attempt at this, so if 
you find that something is amiss please give me a call.  A
program TERM.COM is included to help you in setting up this file
and the SBASIC source for this is also included.  This file
cannot be set up using WordStar or some other word processor. 
The sample TERM.DEF file included with the package is for the
ADM3A and was tested on a KAYPRO II running a 5 MHz and CP/M
2.2e.

	The programmable portion of the calculator has the
ability to save and load the simple programs that have been
entered and samples of these are included :

		simple.clc	performs 3 + 3 = 6
		eqn.clc		solves y=4(x*x)+3x-16
		sum.clc		finds the sum of the first n integers
		quadrat.clc	solves quadratic equation
				coeficients a,b,c -> x,y,z registers to start

These programs can be run by typing load <ret> and then the
program name; following this set up which you can see take place
you enter r/s and the program begins execution.

	This program is a start on an automated desktop that will
eventually include a personal calendar program, rolodex file, and 
whatever else someone suggests.  This brings me to the most
important point of the .doc file.  Please report any bugs back to
me and also any improvements that you think are worthy of inclusion.

	ENJOY

FRANK H. LEVINSON
376 WHIPPANY ROAD
WHIPPANY, NJ 07981
(201)-267-1462 (VOICE)
(201)-267-2880 (DATA STARTING JAN 1, 1984)
2.2e.

	The programmable portion of the calculator has the
a