.po5
.FO FRONT.DOC v. 5.0  (C) 1984, 1985 BY CLAUDE OSTYN           PAGE # 
                              FRONT.DOC
               Documentation for FRONT.COM version 5.0
              Copyright (c) 1984, 1985 by Claude Ostyn 

  This document and the programs it describes may be copied, used 
and distributed freely at no cost for the benefit and enjoyment 
of all CP/M users.  They may not be sold or included in a package 
for sale, under any name, in whole or in part, without the prior 
written permission of the copyright owner, but copies may be sold
by non-profit users groups as long as the price does not exceed 
the cost of the blank media and duplication.  Commercial use is 
subject to payment of a fee or of royalties.  The programs may 
only be distributed as a package including FRONT50.COM, 
FRNSTL50.COM, FRNT50PT.ASM, FRONTSUB.DOC and FRONT50.DOC (this 
document).  The copyright notices may not be altered.
  I specifically disclaim any warranties, implied or otherwise, 
as to the performance and suitability of this software for any 
purpose.  If it works, great.  If it doesn't, don't blame me, 
but feel free to blame whoever concocted your version of CP/M. 

       Since I spent considerable time and effort to 
     develop and debug this software, I would like a 
     reasonable payment if it turns out to be useful to 
     you.  A modest contribution ($15 or more) will be 
     welcome as a tangible sign of appreciation.  
       I also trust that you will be totally honest and 
     will mention this when you pass FRONT around.

       Comments, reviews, picture postcards, gourmet 
     chocolate, suggestions and bug reports are also 
     welcome, of course.

                          Claude Ostyn
                          P.O. Box 2035                            
                       Sitka, Alaska 99835


                            CONTENTS

1.    Changes since last versions
2.    Introduction
3.    Description of FRONT
      A.  Short description
      B.  Hardware/software requirements       
      C.  Using FRONT
4.    Installation
5.    Installation procedures using FRNSTL50.COM
      A.  Terminal installation
      B.  File types installation
      C.  Special features
      D.  Saving the installed FRONT
6.    Custom installation using FRNT50PT.ASM
7.    Technical notes
8.    Troubleshooting      
9.    Using FRONT with a hard disk.


1. CHANGES SINCE LAST VERSION

               The last circulated version FRONT was FRONT49.
               The following have been added or corrected in v.5.0
               - fixed bug in Osborne 1 installation
               - supports more non-standard CP/M implementations

               Other improvements over the original FRONT.COM 
               which had been added in previous versions include: 
               - CP/M Plus compatibility; 
               - ability to change the user area as well as the 
                 logged drive;
               - optional alphabetic sorting of the command on 
                 the menu;   
               - compatibility with some Trantor hard disk CCP 
                 modifications; 
               - improved compatibility with CP/M Plus;
               - compatibility with JG Communications clock 
                 software version 3.2 for the Osborne 1;   
               - automatic repetition of FRONT after execution of 
                 the called program by using a standard CP/M 
                 feature available on most systems (the feature
                 can be cancelled by ESCaping);
               - improved installation program with display of 
                 all settings at main menu;
               - support for ANSI terminal video addressing and 
                 support for arrow keys on more terminals;  
               - optional and adjustable delay before execution 
                 of the called program (for those "oops!" 
                 situations);
               - optional display of disk label below drive name;
               - for Osborne 1 owners, more reliable screen size 
                 recognition with or without Screen-Pac.  
               - additional terminal support
               - options submenu
               - improved compatibility with old Kaypro II;
               - conflict with SUBMIT in the standard Osborne 1
                 installation has been eliminated;

                                    -----
      
2. INTRODUCTION

               A while back I got frustrated with the otherwise 
               excellent public-domain program MENU.COM because 
               it did not allow me to enter arguments after 
               selecting a command, or to run CBASIC and DBASE
               programs without creating an extra alias .COM 
               program.  I also needed to set up turn-key systems
               for people who were utterly confused by CP/M.
               Out of this came FRONT.COM.  


3. DESCRIPTION

A. SHORT         FRONT.COM is a front-end utility for CP/M.  It
   DESCRIPTION replaces the A> prompt with a menu of available 
               programs and lets you select the command to run by 
               just moving a highlight to the command name with 
               the arrow keys and pressing one other key.  Its 
               size is only 6K.

                 The menu shows the names of programs (.COM) 
               files present on the disk.  Optionally, the menu 
               will also show the names of .SUB, .BAS and other 
               program files which require an interpreter to run.

                 The menu is automatically updated as files are 
               added to the disk or erased, or if you log in 
               another disk or user area.  The menu order 
               is normally the same as in the disk directory.  It 
               can also be in alphabetical order.

                 There are two ways to execute a command from the 
               menu.  One way is to use the arrow keys to move 
               the cursor to the name of the program to run and 
               press either RETURN or the space bar.  If you 
               press the space bar, you will be prompted for 
               additional arguments.  The second way is to start 
               typing in the command.  As you type, the names 
               which do not match the command you are typing 
               disappear from the menu, so you only have to type 
               in enough characters to uniquely identify the 
               command.  As soon as FRONT recognizes what you 
               want, it will show you the command and ask for 
               optional arguments.

                 To run a Basic program, for instance, you would 
               not have to type in MBASIC MYPROGRM, but you would 
               just move the cursor over the name MYPROGRM and 
               press RETURN and it will be executed.  Or you 
               could start typing "M" and all the names which 
               don't begin with "M" would disappear from the 
               menu.  Then you would type "Y" and, if no other 
               command begins with "MY", FRONT would show you 
               "MYPROGRM" and ask for optional arguments.  As 
               soon as you press RETURN, FRONT will execute the 
               command MBASIC MYPROGRAM.  

                 FRONT.COM is designed to be reloaded every time 
               a program ends with a "warm boot", so it is very 
               possible that you will never see the A> prompt.  
               However, it will also let you exit to CP/M by just 
               pressing the ESC key.




B. HARDWARE      FRONT.COM can run on just about any computer 
  & SOFTWARE   which has an addressable cursor video display and 
 REQUIREMENTS  runs CP/M 2.2 or CP/M Plus.  The minimum allowable
               screen width is 52 columns.


Video control    FRINSTAL.COM, which should be distributed along 
               with FRONT.COM, will automatically patch FRONT.COM 
               for a number of different terminals and computers.  
               Note that the version number for FRINSTAL has to 
               match the version number for FRONT.
                 When installed for an Osborne 1, FRONT will 
               automatically adjust the width of the menu 
               according to the current screen size if it detects 
               the Osborne 80-column upgrade.

Operating        FRONT has no special requirements and will run 
system         with any standard CP/M 2.2 or CP/M Plus system 
               configuration, and with reasonably standard ZCPR 
               implementations.  It has been tested successfully 
               on several models of Kaypro, Osborne and other 
               brands.  FRONT will automatically recognize and 
               adjust itself to work with different CP/M sizes 
               and versions.  It does not leave a "sleeper" in 
               memory and therefore has no effect on the size of 
               the TPA and does not interfere with programs which 
               make direct calls or integrity checks on the BDOS 
               or BIOS.

Auto-repeat      With most CP/M machines, FRONT can reload itself 
feature        automatically after executing the selected 
               program.  Since different machines can handle this 
               differently, FRINSTAL will allow you to select a 
               method to do this.

Auto-start       With the Osborne 1, FRONT should normally be 
feature        renamed AUTOST and will then be loaded 
               automatically.  With other machines, you may have 
               to patch your system to take advantage of the 
               undocumented CP/M autoload feature.  More details 
               in the technical section.   














C. USING FRONT

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
+  Drive A            FRONT - (c) 1985 by Claude Ostyn  - Version 5.0  +
+  Label: -WSASM.001                                                   +
+                                                                      +
+   (WORDSTAR)  SUPERDIR  FILTER    XERA      UNERA                    +
+    PROOF      NSWEEP    PIP       COPYDISK  MODEM7                   +
+    ASM        LOAD      ASM&LOAD  RESOURCE                           +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+                                                                      +
+   Use (ARROW KEYS) to select command, (RETURN) to run it,            +
+   (SPACE) to enter optional execution parameters,                    +
+   (+) to change logged drive/user or (ESC) for options               +
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 Fig. 1:  FRONT.COM  menu display.  Yours will probably look
          different, depending on the files on your disk and your 
          screen size.  


HOW IT WORKS     FRONT looks up all the files of certain types 
               (such as .COM, .SUB, .BAS, etc.--as determined 
               during installation ) present on the disk in the 
               default user area and displays them in a table.   
               The type can be shown after the name or not (this 
               can be toggled by pressing "." (the period key).  

What's on        Files with the SYS attribute set, which would 
the menu       not be show with the CP/M DIR command, are not 
               included in the menu.  Files are listed in the 
               same order as in the directory, with the first 
               name in the top left corner, then second one to 
               its right, etc. (see Figure 1), unless the sorted 
               menu option has been selected with FRNSTL50, in 
               which case they are listed in alphabetic order.

Selecting        The first name on the list is underlined or 
a command      highlighted (depending on the terminal), or set 
with the       between brackets on terminals which do not have 
cursor         highlighting or underlining capabilities.
                 By using the arrow keys (or either the standard 
               CP/M ^H^J^K^L or the WordStar ^S^X^D^E diamond if 
               the arrow keys don't work), the highlight is moved 
               from name to name.  It can be moved freely in any 
               direction and will wrap around at the end of each 
               line and back to the first name if moved beyond 
               the last one on the list.


Logging to       If the desired command is not on the disk, 
another disk   pressing the "+" or "=" key will let you log in 
               another disk or drive or another user area. 

Executing        Once the desired command is highlighted, 
a command      pressing RETURN will automatically load and 
               execute it.  If additional arguments are 
               required, pressing SPACE instead will present a 
               prompt line to be filled in.

Another way      You can also start typing the name of the 
to select a    command.  The names that do not match are erased 
command        from the menu until only one name is left, and 
               then you are prompted for parameters.  If the 
               command name is shorter than other names which 
               begin with the same letter, just press RETURN to 
               indicate the end of the name.

Special types    In addition to the .COM files, the following 
on the menu    file types can be listed in the menu:  .SUB, .BAS, 
               INT, .CMD, or other types of your choice.  Up to 
               eight different file types, in addition to COM, 
               may be selected by using FRINSTAL.COM.

                 Files with the type .SUB require that SUBMIT.COM 
               or an improved version of it such as EX14.COM be 
               available--usually on drive A.  If the .COM file 
               is not present, you will be warned with an error 
               message when you try to execute that command, and 
               returned to the menu.  Similarly, .BAS files will 
               require MBASIC, etc.  You may have to use 
               FRINSTAL.COM to change the name of the .COM file 
               used to run the files of each type.

Running FRONT    Some programs do not end with a warm boot, and 
again          you will just see the dreaded old A> prompt.  If 
               your system is set to re-run FRONT at every warm 
               boot, just force the warm boot by typing ^C.  On 
               some machines, you may have to log back to the A: 
               drive, user 0 before typing ^C.  If FRONT still 
               does not run, type A:FRONT (or whatever name under 
               which FRONT was installed).

                 The last line of any submit file must be the 
               command A:FRONT (or the name under which FRONT was 
               installed).

Adding hidden    To see and execute commands which have been 
files to the   "hidden" by setting the SYS attribute, press ESC 
menu           for the options menu, then H to toggle the hidden
               file display.  These files will now be added to 
               the menu.  



The "?"          If you read this far, you deserve a goodie.  By 
peek trick     pressing '?' when the highlight is over a command 
               name, whatever is printable in the first 128 bytes 
               of the corresponding file will be displayed.  If 
               the command is a .SUB file, you will be able to 
               read at least the first few lines and figure out 
               what it does.  Most .COM files do or should have 
               some kind of ASCII tag at the beginning to 
               identify the program and version number.

Painless         You can exit to CP/M without executing a menu 
exit with ESC  command by pressing ESC the selecting X for eXit.
               This turns off the auto-repeat feature, so you 
               will have to restart FRONT yourself at the A> 
               prompt if you want to see the menu again.


4. INSTALLATION

Setting up       On most disks, the most often used program 
the menu       should be listed first on the menu.  Since FRONT 
               will find and list the executable files on any 
               disk, this section deals with how to set up the 
               disks from which you will be reading a menu.

Using the        To be listed first on the menu, a name must be   
directory      first in the disk directory and the sorted menu.                     
order option   option must be off.
                  There are two ways to achieve this:            
               a. Use PIP or NSWEEP to copy the programs onto an 
                  empty formatted disk in the order in which you 
                  want them to appear.
               b. Use a utility such a SAP.COM or SORTDIR.COM to 
                  rearrange the directory (not available at this 
                  writing for CP/M Plus).  Temporarily rename the 
                  files, giving them names in the alphabetic 
                  order of the final directory.  Run SAP, and 
                  rename the files to their old name.
               c. If you are using a hard disk, use NSWEEP to 
                  copy all the files to another user area, delete 
                  them in the current area, log to the other user 
                  area and copy the files back one by one in the 
                  desired order to the original area.

Using the        The file starting with the smallest valid ASCII
sorted menu    character will be listed first on a sorted menu.
option         Therefore, the command ABC will be listed before 
               the command BCD if the sorted menu option is 
               installed (see FRNSTL50 below).  The advantage is 
               that you don't have to do any copying of files or 
               manipulation of your directory, and it makes 
               commands easier to find in a crowded menu.  The 
               disadvantage is that your favorite commands will 
               usually not be listed first.
 

Selecting        Use the "STAT filename $SYS" command or the 
what to show   attribute setting facility of NSWEEP to hide 
               the .COM files and other files which you want to 
               have on the disk but which should not be listed.  
               (If you have CP/M Plus, use the SET command).  I 
               usually hide FRONT.COM also.
  
                 It is a good idea to have a directory program such 
               as SUPERDIR.COM, SD.COM or NSWEEP.COM which can 
               list files hidden with the SYS attribute.  
               Obviously this directory program is one you will 
               want to be able to call from the menu.  Do not set 
               it to SYS.

                 Note that since it is no longer necessary to 
               type the command names, they can be as long as 
               CP/M will allow.  "WORDSTAR" is a lot friendlier 
               than WS.

 
Easy             FRINSTAL.COM will patch FRONT.COM (or its  
installation   renamed version AUTOST.COM on an Osborne 1).
with           It will prompt you and you can run through the 
FRINSTAL       whole procedure in less than three minutes.  

                 FRINSTAL.COM installs the video screen control 
               codes for your terminal or computer, and certain 
               functional characteristics, such as whether to 
               show the type after the command name, which types 
               of files will be listed on the menu, and which 
               .COM files are used to run the commands listed.


5.  INSTALLATION PROCEDURES USING FRNSTL50.COM
 
                 (FRONT INSTALLATION PROGRAM, version 5.0)

                 To use FRINSTAL, put the disk with FRINSTAL.COM 
               (normally distributed under the name FRNSTL50.COM)
               and FRONT.COM (normally distributed under the name 
               FRONT50.COM) in drive A.  If FRONT50.COM is not on 
               the same disk as FRINSTAL, put the disk that 
               contains it in drive B.

   STARTING      At the A> prompt, type FRNSTL50 <cr>
   FRNSTL50    (<cr> stands for "press the RETURN key").
               If the file name offered by FRNSTL50 is not 
               correct, type in the file name under which we 
               should look for FRONT50, then <cr>.   If the file 
               is found and is indeed a compatible version, you 
               will be presented with the main menu, otherwise 
               try another name, or press CTRL-C to exit. 
                 All the changes you make with FRNSTL50 are 
               reversible at any time.

                 The version number for FRINSTAL has to be the 
               same as the version number for the FRONT.COM 
               program you are installing.  FRINSTAL will check 
               and refuse to install an incorrect version, since 
               it would probably clobber it.

Installation     The main menu presents you with a screenful of 
main menu      information.  It will show:
               - The current file name for your version of 
                 FRONT;
               - the computer or terminal for which FRONT is 
                 currently installed;
               - which file types will be listed and executed by 
                 FRONT;
               - current settings of some special features;
               - a menu from which you may select an item by 
                 pressing just one key.  The choices are 
                 "A", "B", "C", "S" ,"?" or "ESC".
                   You press "?" for more information or "ESC"
                 to quit and return to CP/M.  The other choices 
                 are explained below.

A. TERMINAL      All you have to do here is press one key for the 
  INSTALLATION terminal or computer of your choice.  Then look at 
               the top of the screen to confirm your selection 
               and press "X" to return to the main menu.  If your 
               terminal is not listed, another selection might 
               work, or special installation will be required.  
               (See section 6).

B. FILE TYPES   The file types which FRONT will list and execute 
               can be modified here.  There are 8 "slots" for 
               file types in addition to .COM (only the 
               "occupied" slots are shown on the main menu).  If 
               you change, add or remove any of the types, you 
               will also be asked to define the name and drive 
               for the .COM file used to execute the command.

C. SPECIAL       Here you are prompted for certain operational 
   FEATURES    settings.  If you like the current setting, just 
               press RETURN to leave it as it is.
                 The first question you must answer here is      
               whether you want the type to be shown after the  
               file name on the FRONT menu.  This has no effect 
               on whether the file names themselves will be     
               listed.  Answering "N" for no makes for a less   
               cluttered menu on which more names can fit.      

                 You will then be asked if you want the menu 
               sorted alphabetically.

                 The next question is whether to display the disk 
               label.  The disk label is an empty file beginning 
               with a "-" which many CP/M users put on their 
               disks for use with the public-domain CAT.COM 
               cataloguing program.  If you are using CPM Plus 
               and there is a label in the directory that label 
               will be shown instead. 

                 Next is the auto-repeat method.

                 If you have an Osborne 1, you may select the 
               auto-repeat option 1, "Osborne 1 AUTOST", and then 
               save FRONT under the name A:AUTOST.COM.

                 On most other systems, you may select option 2, 
               "Standard CP/M autorepeat", unless your version of 
               CP/M has a better way to do it, in which case you 
               would select option 0.

                 If you select option 2, you will have to follow 
               certain simple rules when using FRONT (see 
               FRONTSUB.DOC for details).  In case of doubt, 
               select option 2.

D. SAVING        You can save as many copies of your installed 
   AFTER       FRONT under as many names as you want.  Just enter 
   INSTAL-     the new name after selecting "S" for save, or <cr> 
   LATION      to save under the current name.  Since FRNSTL50 
               does a disk reset, do NOT press CTRL-C if you 
               put in a new disk.  You will be returned to the 
               main menu after each save operation.  If you are 
               using option 2 to auto-repeat FRONT, rename it 
               ONLY by reading it then saving it under another 
               name with FRNSTL50.
                 

6. CUSTOM INSTALLATION USING FRNT50PT.ASM

                 The file FRNT50PT.ASM contains a listing of the 
               user-patchable areas of FRONT.COM.  If you are 
               knowledgeable in 8080 assembly language and 
               FRNSTL50.COM is not enough for you, you can use 
               this listing to create a patch overlay for FRONT.  
               There are 3 major patch areas:  terminal 
               installation, the additional patch area MORPAT 
               which could be used to set up FRONT to auto-repeat, 
               and functional installation.  Every label shown in 
               the listing corresponds to an address called by 
               FRONT, so be careful not to change the memory 
               location of any label or the copyright notice.  In 
               case of doubt, it is safer to use 
                              ORG address
               before any label in your ASM file.  FRINSTAL may 
               affect the INISUB, UNISUB, EXESUB, ESCSUB and 
               MORPAT areas.  The Osborne 1 and Radio-Shack 
               installations, for instance, modify these areas.  
               Do not try to patch your original version of 
               FRONT; always work on a copy.  Note that FRONT 
               will not work if the copyright notice is altered.


7. TECHNICAL AND SPECIAL SYSTEM INFORMATION

Setting up to start FRONT automatically

   OSBORNE 1:    If your computer is an Osborne 1, rename 
               FRONT.COM to AUTOST.COM.  Make sure your system 
               has not been modified to look for a file other 
               than AUTOST.  You should run the FRINSTAL program 
               to confirm that FRONT or AUTOST is set correctly 
               and to see what other functional choices are 
               available.  If you use the newer JG Communications 
               clock software, use auto-repeat option 2 only 
               since it does its own thing with warm boots and 
               defeats the normal Osborne way of doing things.

   MORROW        The default setting for the arrow keys on the 
   MD5 & MD11  Morrow is bizarre and non-standard.  You can 
               insert the command KEY CPM into PROFILE.SUB, and 
               create a CPM.KEY file with standard definitions.
               FRONT will not run properly if COPILOT has been
               run, so it should be listed before COPILOT GO in 
               PROFILE.SUB.
  
  ALL          Insert the command FRONT as the last line of    
  CP/M Plus    the file PROFILE.SUB on your boot disk (except on 
  SYSTEMS      Morrow, see above).  FRONT will execute 
               automatically every time you start or reset your 
               computer.  It  will be executed again at the end 
               of a called program if the autorepeat option 2 has 
               been selected.  FRONT.COM must be in user area 0 
               on drive A and set to SYS with the SET command.


  OTHER          If your computer is not an Osborne and you want 
  CP/M 2.2     FRONT to start automatically, it is a little more 
  SYSTEMS      complicated.

                 First check if your particular CP/M is set up
               to run a program automatically (a menu program, 
               for instance).  If it does, you're in luck:  just 
               install FRONT.COM with FRINSTAL and rename it to 
               whatever name your CP/M looks for.  If you're 
               really lucky, there may be a way to make it run 
               the program at every warm boot (in which case 
               you'd use the autorepeat option 0 in the special 
               features menu).

                 If your CP/M implementation does not have a 
               convenient way to set up a program to run 
               automatically, you will have to patch it.  Follow 
               the instructions below very carefully, and it 
               should work.  You will need the public domain 
               program DU.COM (also known as DSKNURSE), found on 
               the FOG/UTL.019 disk under the name DU-V77.COM, or 
               a more recent version.  

                 In the instructions that follow, (cr) means 
               "press the RETURN or ENTER key".

                 First make a working copy of your system disk 
               and put DU.COM and FRONT.COM on the working disk.  
               Use SYSGEN to copy the system tracks onto the 
               working disk.  Put your originals away.  Do no 
               write-protect the new disk.

                 Boot the new disk and at the A> prompt, type
               
                    DU(cr) 

                The DU prompt is a ':' 

                  Type in the following lines in UPPERCASE.  Do 
               not type the ':' which is just the prompt.  The 
               "0" in "T0" is a zero. 

                   :T0;S1;=COPYRIGHT(cr)

                         (Do not type this:  DU will show track 
                          and sector number, then "AT 21".
                          If you do not see "AT 21", quit now, 
                          you have a nonstandard version of CP/M)

                   :CH7,5(cr)
                   :CA8,FRONT (cr)   
                   :W(cr)
                   :X(cr)
                   A> (you are back at CP/M prompt)

                 This will patch your system to run FRONT 
               automatically.  Reboot, and FRONT.COM should come 
               on.  If it does not, use SYSGEN to copy the CP/M 
               system again on your working disk and try again, 
               watching your typing carefully.  If it still does 
               not work, seek help from someone familiar with 
               your version of CP/M.  Some versions, like the 
               Pickles & Trout CP/M for the TRS-80 computers, 
               have a special utility to set up a program to run 
               automatically, and this patch may not work with 
               them.  This is why you did this experiment using a 
               copy, not an irreplaceable master disk...  Right?

                 If this patch does work, you can use SYSGEN to 
               copy the modified CP/M to any disk on which you 
               might put FRONT.  Remember:  Never modify or copy 
               anything on your original disks!


Automatic re-execution of FRONT

                 With most CP/M machines, FRONT can reload itself 
               automatically at a warm boot.  Since different 
               machines can handle this differently, FRINSTAL 
               will allow you to select a method.  The easiest 
               is if your version of CP/M can be set to execute 
               the program at every warm boot.  In that case, you 
               would select autorepeat option 0.

                 The "standard CP/M" method (autorepeat option 2) 
               uses the facility built into the CCP to handle 
               SUBMIT files.  See FRONTSUB.DOC for more details.

                 With the Osborne 1, if FRONT has been renamed 
               AUTOST and the autorepeat option 1 selected, then 
               it can be reloaded automatically if you end up 
               on drive A.  It does this by setting a "legal" 
               flag in the Osborne 1 BIOS (versions 1.3 and 1.4x) 
               to make this happen again at every warm boot.
                 This method cannot be used when a .SUB file is 
               executed, and thus your .SUB files must end with a 
               command to run FRONT again.


8. TROUBLESHOOTING

Garbage on screen     

               - Run FRNSTL50 and check terminal installation.
                 If it is correct according to FRNSTL50 and it 
                 does not work, drop me a note.

Arrow keys don't work properly

               - Check terminal installation 
                 or use CTRL-H, CTRL-J, CTRL-K, CTRL-L.
               - If you are using a Morrow machine, see your
                 documentation on how to set the arrow keys.   
               - If you know how to use DDT or SID, use the 
                 information in FRNT50PT.ASM to modify the arrow 
                 key definitions.

System crashes when trying to execute a command

               - Probably non-standard CCP or system 
                 configuration.  Use FRNSTL50 and set "Standard
                 CP/M" to "No".
               - Some programs which alter high memory may
                 interfere with the normal functioning of CP/M
                 (UNIFORM, or CO-PILOT on the Morrow, for 
                 example).  Try without these programs.



FRONT won't run again automatically after executing a command

               - FRONT.COM must be on drive A, user 0.
               - FRONT.COM should only be renamed by reading it 
                 with FRNSTL50 and saving it under the new name.
               - Check that the self-repeat option has been 
                 installed correctly (by reading FRONT.COM with 
                 FRNSTL50).
               - If using option 2, read FRONTSUB.DOC.
               - If using the Osborne 1 AUTOST repeat method, you 
                 must log back to drive A and do a ^C if your
                 program did not return you to drive A.
               - If you use the Osborne 1 AUTOST method, a copy
                 of AUTOST.COM must be present in each user area.
               - The last line of a .SUB file executed by FRONT 
                 must be the command to run FRONT again.


"A$USER " or " A>USER" followed by a number appears on the screen 
after executing a command.  Is that an error message?

               - No, it is only CP/M executing a command that 
                 FRONT put in $$$.SUB to make sure you would be 
                 returned to the user area you started from (this 
                 is mostly for the benefit of hard disk users).


When executing a command, there is no time to read the screen 
before FRONT runs again and overwrites it

               - Try to freeze the screen with Control-S.
                 Hit Control-S again to continue.
               

Not enough space on screen for all the names to list

               - See Section 9 below.


System crashes when exiting the called program

               - See installation notes about the auto-
                 repeat feature
               - Make sure the disk in drive A has valid system 
                 tracks.


Front crashes or freezes up when using a hard disk

               - There may be too many files to list and 
                 the internal name buffer was not large enough. 
                 See section 9.
               - Your hard disk BIOS or CCP location in memory 
                 may be non-standard.


Other bizarre behavior

               - Drop me a note.  Describe what happened as 
                 precisely and completely as possible.  Also       
                 describe your machine and disk setup.  Be sure 
                 to indicate which FRONT version number you are 
                 using.  Be patient.


9. FRONT WITH A HARD DISK

                 The menu space in FRONT is limited (it depends 
               on your screen size) and hard disk users may find 
               that there is not enough room for all the commands 
               to be listed, so the names will start overwriting 
               each other as the cursor moves around.  FRONT 
               itself will in theory still be functional, so if 
               you select a command or press ESC it will respond, 
               though it may display garbage instead of the name 
               of the executed command.  There are two ways 
               around this problem:
               - Use the 16 user areas which are available under 
                 CP/M.  Put your word processing stuff in one 
                 user area, your spreadsheet stuff in another 
                 one, etc.  
               - Hide all non-menu executable files of the types 
                 listed by FRONT by setting them to "SYS" status;  
                 this way they won't be crowding the menu, but 
                 they will still be available by ESCaping to 
                 CP/M or for use by SUBMIT or other programs.

                 they will still be availa«