	REAL TIME MICROSYSTEMS ASSEMBLER - INSTRUCTIONS

This disk includes a new assembler from Real Time Microsystems,
2240 Main St., #18, Chula Vista, CA 92011.  This assembler is
required to assemble the source for TARBELL BASIC, since it
is too large to fit on one diskette.  The unique feature of
this assembler in this regard, is that it has a pseudo-op
called LINK, which causes the assembly process to continue
with the file named as it's operand.  This allows assembly
of a large program which is broken up into several different
files on different disks.

Because of some of the bugs listed below, however, this
assembler cannot be used to assemble the file named TBASICIO.ASM
on this disk.  Use the CP/M assembler for this instead.

After typing RTMASM, the following functions are available:

DO <filename>	Open a .DO (like submit) and use it for input.
QT		Close all files and return to CP/M.
CL		Close all files and restart assembler.
LN		Disable all console listing.
LE		Enable error printout on the console.
LI		Enable program listing on the console.
LS		Sort the symbol table and list it, if listing on.
PE		Enable list device (high speed printer).
PD		Disable list device.
ER <filename>	Make a file of all statements containing errors.
		(.ERR)
SY <filename>	Make a file containing the xymbol table (.SYM).
HX <filename>	Make an Intel hex format file (.HEX).
PR <filename>	Make a file of the program listing (.PRN).
AS <filename>	Assemble the file (.ASM).

NOTE:  Use filenames without extention.

Typical Sequence:

	LN
	LE
	SY TBASIC
	HX TBASIC
	AS TBASICA1
	QT

The above sequence will assemble TARBELL BASIC, without the .PRN
file, but giving the .HEX and .SYM file.  The .SYM file is not in
ASCII format, so if you want a symbol table listing, use the PE
and the LS commands (may be deferred to later).
Known bugs:  1.  It will not assemble a line containing
exclamation points to seperate instructions.  2.  It will flag as
an error a comment line beginning with a semicolon (use an asterisk).
3.  It will flag as an error a line containing only a label.
4.  It will flag as an error a line with a label which duplicates
one which is inside a false conditional assembly.  5.  The letter
"A" cannot be used instead of PSW in a PUSH instruction.

Error Types:

DUP	Duplicate Label
EXP	Expression error
UND	Undefined symbol
OVR	8-bit operand too large
MNE	mnemonic error
REG	Illegal register

The psuedo-ops are identical to the CP/M assembler, except
for the new one:	LINK <filename> (no extension)
A drive can be specified in the usual fashion (A: or B:).








