THE BEST FIRST LANGUAGE
by Sol Katz

A question that always comes up when talking  with new  computer 
owners is "What language  should I  learn?" The  answer must  be 
COMAL.  COMAL  (COMmon Algorithmic  Language) is  the most  user 
friendly language written to date.

The most user friendly feature of COMAL is  its syntax  checker. 
After you enter a newly typed line, it  checks it  for mistakes. 
It will point to where it thinks you made the mistake and  tells 
you why it isn't happy. Messages like "Expect  a colon  here" or 
"Unbalanced parenthesis" help you fix your  mistake at  the time 
you type it. As soon as you correct the mistake  COMAL lets  you 
continue. In other words, COMAL will  not accept  a line  with a 
syntax error.

The  next  really user  friendly feature  of COMAL  is automatic 
formatting. COMAL wants you to be able to read your programs, so 
it takes out extra spaces in each line and automatically indents 
whenever you use structured programming. COMAL  is a  structured 
programming language, just as Pascal, C,  FORTRAN 77,  and COBOL 
are. Once you learn COMAL, it is only a small step to picking up 
other  structured  languages.  BASIC  (and  older   versions  of 
FORTRAN)  depend  on  GOTO   statements  for   branching,  while 
structured  languages  only  use  GOTO for  very advanced  level 
programming,  and  rarely  at  that.  The  structures  of  COMAL 
include:

IF...THEN...ELIF...ELSE...ENDIF
CASE..OF...WHEN...OTHERWISE...ENDCASE
WHILE...DO...ENDWHILE
REPEAT...UNTIL
FOR...STEP...ENDFOR

COMAL is also user friendly when entering or editing a  program. 
The AUTO  command automatically  supplies line  numbers. [Editor 
Note: COMAL uses line  numbers only  for editing  purposes. They 
are not used as addresses as is the case in  BASIC]. The  syntax 
of the AUTO command tells COMAL what line  number to  start with 
and what number to increment the  line number  with. So,  if you 
like your programs to start with 2468 and to go up with 3's, you 
can do it. If you want  to delete  a range  of lines  you do  it 
with:

        DEL linenumber-linenumber.

You can also list a range of lines the same way, and to be  user 
friendly, COMAL also lets you stop and start the listing.  COMAL 
also provides a full screen editor.

For advanced users, COMAL  has user  defined functions  allowing 
for multiple statements and multiple returns,  depending on  the 
calculated values. Compare that with BASIC which allows only one 
statement. COMAL  procedures allow  local and  global variables, 
and also allow passing  of arrays  as parameters.  If you  don't 
know what this means,  that's OK  since BASIC  doesn't allow  it 
anyway, but FORTRAN, C, and Pascal  use procedures  extensively. 
COMAL allows you to create new commands using procedures.

COMAL  allows  machine language  packages to  be linked  to your 
programs.  Many  COMAL  systems  use this  for Logo-like  Turtle 
Graphics. If you've read about Logo and want to try it (or  want 
your  kids  to try  it) you  can have  it without  getting still 
another language disk.

Now we come to user support. COMAL has  a national  users group, 
and small  special interest  groups attached  to most  Commodore 
clubs.  The  COMAL Users  Group, USA  publishes a  magazine that 
deals only with COMAL. They also distribute public  domain COMAL 
programs on  disk. To  the best  of my  knowledge, there  are no 
national support groups for  C64 Pascal,  C, FORTRAN,  COBOL, or 
Simon's  BASIC.  COMAL  USA  also maintains  electronic bulletin 
boards  (BBS)  on several  of the  commercial telecommunications 
systems. If you're wondering why the  USA (in  COMAL USA)  it is 
because COMAL is the  official educational  programming language 
for 5 European countries.

Since COMAL is a  "standardized" language,  programs written  on 
any  computer  will  work  on any  other computer  that supports 
COMAL, including CP/M, the Commodore 64/128, and the IBM PC.  It 
is currently being developed for the  Apple IIe/IIc.  It can  be 
purchased from the COMAL  Users Group,  USA, 6041  Monona Drive, 
Madison, WI 53716.

So, to answer the  original question,  COMAL is  the best  first 
computer language, but it may be the only computer language that 
you'll ever need to learn.


EOF
