COMAL AND YOU - For Beginners Only
by David Stidolph


WHY LEARN TO PROGRAM?
---------------------

The many commercial computer programs available  today are  more 
than sufficient  for most  people's needs.  If word  processors, 
spread sheets, and data base managers  are all  the computer  is 
used for, learning to program would be a waste of time.

For  some,  however, a  goal is  being able  to learn  something 
new... something that can control that  mysterious box  called a 
computer.  There's  nothing like  the feeling  of accomplishment 
when you type in your first  working program.  Also, familiarity 
with  computers  and  programming  helps  ease   the  sense   of 
helplessness most people get when dealing  with computers.  (How 
did you feel the first time you got  a computerized  bill?) This 
article is for people  who have  made the  decision to  not only 
learn about computers, but to learn programming as well.


WHAT IS A COMPUTER LANGUAGE?
----------------------------

Computers work with a language of zeros and ones called  machine 
code.  This  is  as  difficult  to  use  as  it sounds,  and few 
programmers  now  work  directly  in machine  code. They  choose 
instead to use computer "languages". These range from  low level 
languages like assembly code, where the  words merely  represent 
individual machine  code instructions,  to high  level languages 
which  look  more  like  english.  Compare  the  following   two 
programs:

CP/M (8080) ASSEMBLY CODE: 

          org    0100h
entry:    equ    0005h
print:    equ    09h
cr:       equ    0dh
lf:       equ    0ah
          mvi    c,print
          lxi    d,text
          call   entry
          ret
text:     db     'I like COMAL",cr,lf,'$'
          end

COMAL:

PRINT "I like COMAL"

As  you  can see,  the COMAL  program is  shorter and  much more 
readable. Although the computer  will seem  to understand  COMAL 
once  the  language is  loaded, the  computer itself  still only 
understands  machine  code.  COMAL  is  itself  a  machine  code 
program, but instead of letting you do word processing, or other 
mundane  tasks,  it allows  you to  write, edit,  and run  COMAL 
programs. Think of the  language as  an interpreter  between you 
and the computer. This  means you  don't have  to learn  machine 
code - you only have to make sure  that the  language is  in the 
machine before you can run your COMAL programs.


WHY LEARN COMAL?
----------------

Since BASIC comes with all personal computers today, most people 
think that it is the best  computer language  to learn.  Not so. 
BASIC is  implemented on  so many  computers because  it is  the 
easiest language to write. It has  the fewest  commands, and  NO 
definite standard to follow (any arbitrary  rules can  be forced 
on it). This means that a BASIC program written on  one computer 
may NOT run on any other computer. BASIC does, however, have one 
good feature; the ability to type in a short program and see  it 
execute as soon as you type  the word  RUN. No  text editors  or 
elaborate compiler  commands (needed  in most  other high  level 
languages like  Pascal, Fortran  or Cobol)  are necessary.  This 
makes BASIC seem like a easy-to-learn language for everyone.

COMAL  started  with  this  idea  of  interactive work  with the 
programmer,  then  added  to  it.  Added  were  things  like the 
structured  code  of Pascal,  the graphics  of Logo,  and a  few 
tricks  of  its own.  COMAL is  now the  language taught  in the 
schools of 5 European countries. COMAL is easier  to learn  than 
BASIC, and teaches the idea of  structured programing  necessary 
to using modern computer languages.


HOW DO YOU GET COMAL?
---------------------

CP/M COMAL  is available  in the  United States  from the  COMAL 
Users Group, USA Limited, 6041 Monona  Drive, Madison,  WI 53716 
for under $50. This version runs on CP/M  computers such  as the 
Kaypro, Epson, and Commodore 128. It must be installed for  each 
computer, but data files are included to help install COMAL  for 
most popular CP/M computers. Once COMAL  is installed,  programs 
which don't use machine  specific items,  such as  color on  the 
c128, can run on any other CP/M system  as long  as it  also has 
COMAL installed.

Only CP/M COMAL will be discussed in the  rest of  this article, 
but disk based COMAL for the Commodore 64 is available from most 
local User Groups or may be  ordered directly  from COMAL  Users 
Group for under $20. There is also a COMAL cartridge for the 64, 
and versions of COMAL running on the IBM.

Once you have CP/M COMAL, you must run the INSTALL.COM  directly 
from CP/M. Follow the directions that  come with  CP/M COMAL  to 
install  COMAL  correctly  for  your  computer.  Once  COMAL  is 
installed,  you  never  need  to install  it again,  (unless you 
change computers).  Then to  enter COMAL,  simply type  the word 
COMAL in response to the standard A> prompt.  You are  now ready 
to run COMAL programs.


WHAT DO I DO WITH COMAL?
------------------------

The purpose of COMAL is for YOU to learn how  to write  readable 
programs,  and  one  way  to  learn  is to  first look  at other 
peoples' work. I am going detail certain commands  here so  that 
you can do just that. The commands will be listed  in UPPERCASE, 
but type them in as unshifted letters.


CAT
---

This command will show you what is on the disk  drive. The  disk 
drive sends the disk DIRECTORY (that's what it is called) to the 
computer, and COMAL prints it on the screen. The number  of free 
bytes on the disk are also displayed. DIR may be  used in  place 
of CAT by those who are more comfortable with using it to obtain 
a directory.

COMAL  will  not erase  the program  in memory  while showing  a 
directory of a disk. If you happen to have a two or more drives, 
you can choose between them:

cat "a:"   (This is for drive A)
cat "b:"   (This is for drive B)


LOAD
----

Once you know what is on the disk, you can  load COMAL  programs 
into memory with this command. The  following is  an example  of 
loading a program called filename:

load "filename"

If you don't want to type in the three character  extension, the 
system will insert .SAV as a default.


LIST
----

Once a COMAL program is in memory, you will want  to be  able to 
see it. The command LIST will  do just  that, it  will list  the 
program to the screen. The program is listed one screenful  at a 
time. Hit the spacebar to see the next  screenful, or  the <ESC> 
key to stop the listing. The return key can be  used to  see one 
more line at a time.

You will notice that  each line  has a  number in  front of  it. 
These are  called "line  numbers" and  COMAL uses  them to  keep 
track of the order of the program lines. The order goes from low 
(1) to  high (9999),  and you  can use  any line  number between 
them.

The  LIST  command  can  also be  used to  show just  part of  a 
program. The following are some Examples to do just that:

list          (all lines)
list 100-500
list 100-
list -500
list procname (list named procedure)


RUN
---

When the program you want has been loaded into memory, you start 
the program with the command RUN. The computer does a quick scan 
of  the  program  to  make  sure  it seems  correct, and  starts 
executing with the first line of the program. If an error occurs 
while the program is running, the  program will  stop executing, 
and COMAL will print the line  number it  is having  the trouble 
with, and what the problem is.


MAKING ERRORS
-------------

There is a very  good chance  that you  will make  typing errors 
while trying these commands. COMAL checks each line you type for 
errors, and if it cannot understand what you typed, it will stop 
and give you an error message. It might go out to the disk drive 
and get the error message, or  it might  just print  the message 
itself  (that  depends  on  whether you  have error  messages in 
memory or not). If you get an error, COMAL will  put the  cursor 
on the  part of  the line  it is  having trouble  with so  DON'T 
PANIC. Just make the correction and press the RETURN key again.


EOF
