This file will be used to provide update information that may
be required between printings of the EDIT reference manual.

Please refer to Section 2 of the manual for information on
installing a working version of EDIT on specific equipment.

When you have a version working on your computer and terminal,
you may run the additional program EDTKEY if you wish to
change the keyboard keys used for specific edit functions.
The program will prompt you how to proceed.

The file NVEDIT.PRN contains information for further configuring
to meet special needs of unusual terminals.  For example, some
require the ability to retain 8 bits on input, and some require
delays after certain terminal control functions.

for further configuring
to meet special needs of unusual terminals.  For example, some
require the ability to retain 8 bits on input, and some require
delays after certain terminal control functions.

s.  If
you are using the Videx 80 column board on your Apple, the
Control-A key has been reassigned to Control-S and the
Control-S key has been reassigned to Control-D.

The file NVPILOT.PRN contains information for further
configuring to meet special needs or to change keys used
for special functions.  Some models of Televideo terminals that
do not respond to codes for insert line or delete line require
that you use this method to obtain these functions.  Select the
Televideo choice when you run NVPILOT and if these functions
do not work, then use DDT to place a zero in the IL and DL
locations.  This will force a rewriting of the screen.

The APPEND statement is not well described and will be
rewritten in the next edition of the manual.
The normal operation of the first WRITE statement after OPENF
is to overwrite information present in an existing file.  The
APPEND statement may be used after OPENF to retain any existing
information in the file, moving the point at which WRITE will
add information to the current end-of-file location.

An additional PILOT statement DIR has been added to
display file directory information.  It may be used in either
immediate or run mode.  It displays either all files or just
.PLT files as determined during the installation process.

An additional PILOT statement XS (EXECUTE SYSTEM)
has been added to allow
overlay and execution of a CP/M program.  Usage is:
XS: <CP/M file name> [<optional parameters>]

An additional PILOT statement RL has been added to
provide scrolling of screen information during PILOT program
execution.  Usage is: RL:n  (n=no. of lines scrolled)

An additional PILOT statement READ has been added to
allow reading a line of data into the entry buffer and into a
string variable.  After OPENing the file, usage is:
READ:<expression>[,$LABEL]
<expression> refers to file number, the optional $LABEL is the
string variable name.

For keyboards that do not provide a backward slash (\), CTL-F
may be used to force immediate execution or abort operation.
