
V Edit Keys:  
 CURSOR MOVEMENT:                   | DELETION:
    up         Ctrl-E or up arrow   |    cursor character    Ctrl-G
    down       Ctrl-X or dn arrow   |    rest of word        Ctrl-Y
    left       Ctrl-S or lt arrow   |    rest of line        Ctrl-N
    right      Ctrl-D or rt arrow   |    character left      DEL
    next word            Ctrl-F     |
    back word            Ctrl-A     | INSERTION:
    tab right            Ctrl-I     |    change modes        Ctrl-O
    left margin      Ctrl-^ or HOME |    tab                 ESC TAB
    end of line          Ctrl-U     |
 LINE/SCREEN MOVEMENT:              | FIND                   ESC F
    top of document      Ctrl-T     |
    end of document      Ctrl-B     | REPLACE                ESC R
    previous screen      Ctrl-R     |
    next screen          Ctrl-C     | HELP                   Ctrl-Q,1
    line forward         Ctrl-Z     | ALT FUNCTION KEYS      Ctrl-Q
    line backward        Ctrl-W     | ESCAPE OPTIONS         ESC
 PRINT DIRECTIVES        Ctrl-P     |
 EXIT and SAVE document  ESC S      | EXIT and ZAP document  ESC Z


v Escape Commands:
After pressing [ESC], choose:

C       Copies marked block: B) within current document or W) into a new file.
D       Delete mode: deletes Block, Character, Entire line, Line right,
            / (block markers), word (to Space).
F       Finds word or string of characters.
G       Global: sets line width, tabs, and special character visibility.
I       Includes text from another document.
M       Moves marked block to cursor position.
N       Normalize: makes word or line Upper or Lower case, Capitalizes word.
R       Replaces word or string with another word or string.
S       Saves document on disk.
X       Starts processing the specified Execute file.
Z       Zaps or deletes document in workspace.
/       Inserts block marker to identify the start or end of a block of text.
CR      Goes to Main Menu selections without ending Edit.
Tab     Inserts a Tab character.
LF or
Ctrl-J  Locates next marked word after Checking Spelling.

For a complete list of EDIT keys, press the AnswerKey while editing.


B Copy or Write Blocks:

The COPY command duplicates a block of text, either in another spot in the
same document or in a separate new document filed on disk.

Block Marker: A special character that marks the start and end of a block
       of text (marked block).  Block markers are inserted in a document by
       pressing [ESC] and typing a slash [/].

Marked Block: A block of text between two block markers.  Two (and only two)
       block markers must already be inserted into the document before the
       following commands are used.

COMMAND - [ESC] C and:

 B   Copies marked block to current cursor location.  The text, still enclosed
     by block markers, remains at its original location, and the same text,
     without block markers, is inserted at the cursor position and justified.
 W   Writes the marked block to a separate new file on disk.  You must type a
     document name so that the block can be filed.  The marked block is left
     in place in the current document, as are the block markers.
[ESC]  Does not copy block, returns to Edit.


C Custom Edit Options:

Word-Wrap       Sends words that run into the right margin down to the start
                of the next line as you type.  With No word-wrap, words are
                split at the right margin.

The following options, when set Yes, cause SuperWriter to display special
characters or symbols in the document.  If your terminal is able to show
"half-intensity" characters, these characters will all be shown in half
intensity, to distinguish them from actual text characters shown at normal
intensity.

Visible Returns  Displays a "~" on the screen each time you press [CR] when
                 editing a document.
Visible Blanks   Displays an underline character on the screen each time you
                 enter a space by pressing the space bar.
Visible Line     Displays a plus sign at the end of a line when words are
  Breaks         wrapped to the next line.
Visible Print    Displays print formatting commands entered through the Print
  Controls       Directive key (Ctrl-P).
Visible Hyphens  Displays a dash for a soft hyphen entered by Ctrl-P -.


D Delete Mode Commands:

In Delete mode any key you press either deletes characters, moves the cursor,
or is ignored.  With options C, E, L and Space, the Edit remains in Delete mode
until you press [ESC] again.

COMMAND - ESC, D and:

Cursor Left, Right, Up and Down keys move the cursor.

  B    Deletes marked block.  Two block markers (use Escape / to set block
       marks) must already be inserted in the current document.  The number
       of lines in that block is counted, and a prompt asks if you want to
       delete that number of lines (Y or N).
  C    Deletes the character at the cursor.
  E    Deletes the entire line.
  L    Deletes the remainder of current line, from the cursor right.
  S    Deletes all spelling marks anywhere in the current document.
  /    Deletes all block markers anywhere in the current document.
Space  Deletes the remainder of word, from the cursor right.
[ESC]  Ends delete mode, returns to Edit.


E Output File Options:

Tabs Replace    Converting extra space characters to Tab characters, where
  Blanks        possible, saves space on the disk.  If you change Tab settings
                in the document later, you may find the document spacing
                changes unexpectedly.

Save Document   Certain programming languages either need not or cannot read
 History/Global the record where these data are kept.  If you are writing
 settings       program code, you may not want to save these data.  Documents
                from another program will not have an area set aside for
                Global settings, so if you want to keep special line widths
                or settings, you must change this setting to Yes.

Output form:    Format can be changed to allow saving files in SuperWriter
                format, External format (for certain other word processors),
                or System list format.  External and System format both
                convert SuperWriter Print Directives to blank equivalents, and
                System also puts a CR LF (or Return) at the end of each line.


F Library File Access Options:

Display  Gives you a quick look at a document.  This option is intended for
         quick reference, so tab settings and line widths are ignored.  You
         may read through as much of the document as needed, and [ESC] back
         to the menu.  The document is only read from disk, not put into the
         workspace, does not affect a document already in the workspace, and
         cannot be changed or edited while being Displayed.
Include  Adds text from another document into the workspace.  A document must
         already be in the workspace.  The Included text is inserted at the
         most recent cursor position in the document.
Delete   Permanently removes a document from the disk directory.  Once a
         document is deleted, it cannot be recovered.  You are asked to
         verify (Yes or No) whether you really want the file removed.
Reset    Allows you to change a disk without ending the SuperWriter program.
Rename   Allows you to rename a disk file.
Spool    Prints a document from the disk allowing you to Edit another document
         at the same time (background printing).  Format the document to be
         spooled with Format to Disk in the Secondary Print Options of the
         Print Menu first.


H Directory Options:

List Documents  Lists all documents on the default drive disk, the disk
                where the last document read is located.

List Specified  Asks you which document or family of documents to list.
 Documents      See the Wildcard explanation below for specifying families
                of documents.

Show Document   When you select one of the above options, the directory
 History        either shows only the document file size and name, or the
                file size, document name, and Author, Comment, Operator,
                Creation Date and Modification Date from the Document History
                section, depending on how this selection is set.

WILDCARD characters

  ?  Represents any single character at the position in which it is placed in
     the document name or extension.
  *  Represents any number of any characters at that position in the document
     name or extension.


I Include Options:

The selections on the Include menu are used to add text from another document
to the document already in the workspace, at the position the cursor was in
when you left the Edit.  They also let you use Keyed document files to quickly
find the exact text you need.

A Key in a document file is a Form Feed character (represented on your display
as "!"), followed by the Key character or words, and [CR].

Specify file     Type the name of the file that contains text you want to
                 include.
Include next     The Utility displays the next section and asks you to accept
  section        or skip that section.
Reset document   The Utility returns to the top of the document, so that the
                 next section is the first screen of the document.
Include Section  The Utility prompts you to Type Section Key.  Enter the
  by Key         entire Key or the first few letters of the Key.  The Utility
                 finds the next occurrence of a Form Feed followed by those
                 specified characters, displays the screen, and prompts you
                 to accept or skip that section. 



J Find Options:

A string is a character or sequence of characters, and can have up to 24
characters.  Type the exact characters you want to find after the Find:
prompt.  When you press [CR] or enter the maximum length string, select
one of the following options:
  V  (Veto) Goes to the next occurrence.  Pressing [ESC], [CR] or Y stops at
     that string, while pressing N finds the next occurrence of the string.
  D  Displays all occurrences of the string after the present cursor position,
     with a short delay.  [ESC] stops the find.
  A  (All) Reports the number of times the string is found in the remainder of
     the document.  The cursor is placed at the last occurrence of the string.
  #  When a number is entered (do not type the # character), Find displays
     the next "number" of occurrences.  The cursor is placed at the string the
     specified number of occurrences from the original cursor position.
[CR] Finds the next occurrence of the specified string.

If the string you want to find includes a Return, use the Home key (or Ctrl-^)
to represent the Return character.

If the string you want to find includes a Print Directive (boldface, italics,
underline, etc.), type Ctrl-P followed by the corresponding letter.


L Move Marked Block:

The MOVE command is used to move a Marked Block of text from one place to
another within the current document.

Block Marker: A special character that marks the beginning and end of a block
     of text (marked block).  Block markers are inserted in a document by
     pressing [ESC] and typing a slash [/].

Marked Block: A block of text between two block markers.  Two (and only two)
     block markers must already be inserted into the document before the
     following commands are used.

COMMAND - [ESC] M and:

  B   Moves marked block to current cursor location.  The text is automatically
      deleted from its old position and inserted at the cursor position.  Block
      markers are removed and the text is rejustified.

[ESC] Returns to the Edit without moving text.


M Global Settings:

SELECT:            SPECIFY BY:

Change line width  Enter maximum line width (characters/line) up to 250.

Change Tab stops   Advance the cursor with the Space bar; stop at desired tab
                   column positions and press the Tab key.  Continue to right
                   margin or press [CR] when finished.

OTHER SELECTIONS: RESULT:

Program mode      Characters (not whole words) wrapped, 80 column line width,
                  visibilities set to appropriate defaults for program entry.

Text mode         Word-Wrap, 65 column line width, visibilities set to
                  appropriate defaults for document editing.

Custom options    Set word-wrap and special character visibility individually.


N Document history:
 An area for Document history is reserved for each document.  This optional
history can be changed or updated using selections from the Document History
menu when the document is being Edited.  The current history for the document
being Edited is shown on the document history screen above the menu.  New
history entered through the menu replaces the old history.

Initial Document   Initial document history consists of the items asked for
  History          when a document is first created: the Author's name (20
                   characters) and, on some systems, the creation date.  This
                   choice also lets you change the Revision number (press
                   [CR] for no change).

Other History data which can be kept with a document are:
        Operator's Name (20 characters)
        Modification Date
        Comment (24 characters)
        Document Number (8 characters)

This Document History is for reference only and does not affect file handling.



P Spooling Options:

Spooling, also known as background printing, means you can print a specially
prepared document from its file on the disk without tying up the computer.
You can Edit one document at the same time another document is printing.

SELECT:         FOR THIS RESULT:

Start Spooling  Starts printing the specified document.

Stop Spooling   Stops printing of the spooled document.

Specify file    Asks you to name the file you want to spool.  Must be done
                before you can start spooling, and can be redone to restart.

Reset Printer   Sets printer at top of page.


Q Replace Options:

A string is a character or sequence of characters, and can have up to 24
characters.  Type the exact characters you want to replace after the
Replace: prompt.  When you press Return or enter the maximum length string,
you are prompted, With:.  Type the characters (if any) you want substituted.
Press [CR] or reach the maximum string length and select one of the following
options:

  V  (Veto) Moves the cursor to the next occurrence.  Typing:
      Y or [CR] Replaces string and repeats choice at the next occurrence,
      N         Leaves string as is and repeats choice at the next occurrence,
      [ESC]     Ends the replace.
  D  Displays and replaces all occurrences of the string, with a brief delay
     each time.  [ESC] stops the replace.
  A  (All) Automatically replaces the string throughout the remainder of the
     document, reports the number of replacements and puts the cursor at the
     last occurrence.
  #  A number (not a # character).  Replaces the next "number" of occurrences
     of the string.  The cursor stops at the last string replaced.
[CR] Replaces the next occurrence of the specified string.



If the string you want to replace includes a Return, use the Home key (or
Ctrl-^) to represent the Return character.

If the string you want to replace includes a Print Directive (boldface,
italics, underline, etc.), type Ctrl-P followed by the corresponding letter.


R Printing Options:

Format and   Formats document according to formatting directives already
  PRINT      placed in the document and begins printing the document.

Format       Formats and displays the document on screen.  You can see how
  On-screen  the formatted document will look before printing it.

Change       Changes the six settings shown above the Print menu (left margin
  Format     line width, spacing, page size, top margin and bottom margin).

Change       Changes settings shown above the Print Menu (number of copies,
  Control    type of forms, last page of the document to print, first page
  Settings   to start printing and, if you use a specialty printer, whether
             to print proportionally and the character pitch).

Secondary    Lets you advance printer paper to top of forms, print without
 Print       formatting, specify a different document to print, or format the
 Functions   document to disk for spooling (background printing) later.

Return to System   Ends the SuperWriter program.


k Secondary Print Options:

Issue Page    Advances the printer by one page, the same as pressing the Top
  Eject       of Forms button on the printer.

Print w/o     Prints the document, including all Embedded Formatting Commands.
  Formatting  These Commands in the text are printed as text and not obeyed.

Specify       Lets you print another document without going back to the Main
  Another     Menu.  Enter a document name and press [CR], then [ESC] to
  Document    return to the Print Menu.

Format to     The document is formatted but not printed.  Instead it is
  Disk        saved on disk as an .SPL file, which can be printed later with
              the Spooling Utility.  Enter a name for this file, or press
              [CR] to use the same name with an extension of .SPL.


S Embedded Print Controls:

The commands under Ctrl-P give you special display formatting features.
Press Ctrl-P and:

  B  Boldfaces text to the next boldface directive or Return.
  C  Centers the current line of text.
  H  Starts a hanging indent at the next tab stop.  Subsequent lines until the
     Return are wrapped to the right of this special tab.  A right parenthesis
     is used to distinguish this indent from a regular tab character.
  I  Italicizes text to the next italics directive or Return.  (Italics will
     appear as underline on printers without italics support.)
  P  Inserts a Page break to start a new page.
  R  Right justifies current line of text.
  U  Underlines text to the next underline directive or Return.
  Sp Inserts a Hard Space which is not adjusted by proportional printing.
  -  Indicates an acceptable place to hyphenate a word, if necessary.
  <  Superscripts (slightly raises) text until the next > or Return.
  >  Subscripts (slightly lowers) text until the next < or Return.
[ESC] Returns to Edit without inserting a Print Directive.


T Workspace Full:

Workspace is full, and you cannot add any more text to this document.

You can save this document now, but you cannot add any more text.  If this is
an inappropriate place to break off the document, or if you anticipate adding
more text in later edits, consider copying the latter part of this document to
another document with the Copy command (Escape C W) and then delete the block.
Save the document and continue writing in the new document.  Remember that you
can string documents together for printing with the Insert formatting command.


U Utility Options:

LIBRARY     = Quickly display any document (does not allow changes).
            - Include sections from another document in the document currently
              in the workspace.
            - Delete a document from the disk.
            - Reset a disk if document disks must be changed.
            - Rename a document.
            - Spool a document (print in background).

DOCUMENT    = Display and revise Document History for the document currently in
History       the workspace.

DICTIONARY  = List or print all the words in a dictionary.
Maintenance - Combine two dictionaries or subtract a dictionary from another.
            - Reorganize, copy or create a dictionary.
            - Delete words from a dictionary.

SUPERCALC   = End SuperWriter and begin SuperCalc or SuperCalc2.


W Save Options:

These options save the edited document on a disk:

Save document     Saves the entire document in workspace, using the same
                  document name.  The previous version of that document is
                  renamed with the file name and a .BAK extension.

Rename and Save   Saves the entire document in workspace on the disk, filed
                  under the name you specify.  The previous version of the
                  document remains on disk with its original file name.

Change Output     You may switch Output Format controls before saving the
                  document.  These controls are only important when using the
                  SuperWriter program to write certain types of computer
                  programs, or when you first save a document created or
                  used with a different program.

Note: Should you decide that you do not want to save the editing changes
      you made to the document, [ESC] from this command and use the Zap
      command ([ESC] Z).  The document in the workspace will be deleted.


Z Zapping the Workspace:

Deleting the workspace empties or erases the current document from the
computer's memory.  It does not effect any documents filed on the disk.
If the current document has been saved on the disk it will remain on the
disk, but any changes made to the document since last saving, printing or
checking spelling will be lost.


; Insert Mark Options:

The following commands insert special control marks in the text of your
document at the current cursor position:

 F  Inserts a Formfeed character (!), used to identify a Section Key in a
    file of boilerplate data.
 S  Inserts a spelling mark (?).
 /  Inserts a block marker (/).
 ^  Followed by a Control character inserts that Control character in the text.
    The character is displayed in dim or half intensity preceded by a ^.  Note
    that [ESC] is a control character.  Pressing [ESC] inserts the control
    character in the text.


: Find Mark Options:

The following commands find special control marks in the text of your document
and place the cursor over the next specified mark.

 F  Finds a Formfeed mark (!).
 P  Finds a Page mark (p).
 S  Finds a Spelling Mark (?).
 /  Finds a Block Mark (/).
 ^  Followed by a Control character finds that Control character.


b Word Review:

OPTION:        DESCRIPTION:

Mark word      Will mark the word with a '?' in the document so you can correct
               it later.  You can easily find it in the Edit with the [ESC]
               [LineFeed] (Ctrl-J) command, or function key.

Add Word to    Will add the word to the dictionary, since it currently is not
Dictionary     there. (Check spelling before adding the word.)

Ignore word    Will not mark the word in the document or add it to the
               dictionary.  For example, the word might be jargon or a proper
               name, acceptable in the current document.

Review         Returns to the previous word so you can change the way you
Previous Word  specified that word be handled.

Quick Review   Quick Review allows you to mark, add, ignore, or view all
               remaining mismatched words in one operation.

Exit           Return to the Edit.  No words are marked or added to dictionary.


c Quick Review Options:

Mark Remaining    Marks all remaining mismatched words without further review.
  Words           Words already reviewed are handled as specified.

Add Remaining     Adds all remaining mismatched words to the dictionary
  Words to        without further review.  Words already reviewed are handled
  Dictionary      as specified.

Ignore Remaining  Ignores all remaining mismatched words.  Words already
  Words           reviewed are handled as specified.

List Remaining    Lists all remaining mismatched words on the terminal screen
  Words           or printer.  After listing words, the program returns to
                  single Word Review and these remaining words can be reviewed.

Return to Word    Returns to reviewing individual words at Mismatched Word
  Review          Review screen.

Return Editor     Ends Word Review without changing document or dictionary.


d Dictionary Options:

OPTION:           DESCRIPTION:

List words in     Lists all the words in a dictionary or a range of words in a
Dictionary        Dictionary.

Combine two       Adds two existing dictionaries together to make a larger,
Dictionaries      more complete dictionary.

Subtract two      Deletes the words contained in one dictionary from a larger
Dictionaries      dictionary, resulting in a smaller dictionary.

Reorganize        Reorganizes the dictionary to make a more compact dictionary
Dictionary        which can be scanned more quickly during Proofreading.

Make copy of      Copies a dictionary, creating a duplicate dictionary with a
Dictionary        different name.

Delete words      Removes any number of words from a dictionary, one at a time.

Create Dictionary Creates a new (empty) dictionary file.


e Proofing Options:

OPTION:              DESCRIPTION:

Review Mismatched    You can mark (M) an individual mismatched word every time
Words                it appears in the original document, ignore (I) a
                     mismatched word, or add (A) it to your Dictionary.

Quick Review         You can handle all mismatched words in the document at one
Mismatched Words     time.  You can mark all mismatched words in the document,
                     add all mismatched words to the dictionary, ignore all
                     words, or list all mismatched words on screen or printer.

Mark All             Automatically marks all mismatched words in the document.
Mismatched Words

Press [ESC] to quit without making any changes.


i Insert Options:

Typeover:        Typed characters replace cursor characters, one for one.
Auto-Insert:     Typeover with Insert at end of word.
Insert:          Typed characters are inserted in text, text is rejustified.
Page Insertion:  Text is opened for larger insertions.

COMMANDS:

 A  Turns Auto-Insert mode On or Off.  When Auto-Insert is selected, the Status
    Line shows Auto.

 I  Turns Insert mode On or Off.  When Insert mode is On, the Status Line shows
    Insert.

  (Typeover mode is On when both Auto-Insert and Insert modes are Off.  When
   Typeover mode is On, the Status Line does not show any Insert status.)

 P  Turns Page Insertion On or Off.  When Page Insertion is On, one of the
    other three modes is also On, and the Status Line shows Page in addition to
    Insert, Auto, or the blank.  When Page Insertion is turned Off, the text
    closes up.


j Case Normalization Commands:

Normalize mode is used to change or adjust text between lower case and capital
letters.  In Normalize mode, all characters are ignored except for the right,
left, up and down cursor movement keys and the following command keys:

  U    Uppercase all characters from cursor right to end of word.
  L    Lowercase all characters from cursor right to end of word.
  A    Uppercase all characters from cursor right to end of line.
  C    Capitalize character at cursor.  All other characters in the word to
       the right of cursor are put in lowercase.
 [CR]  Lowercase all characters from cursor right to end of line.
 [ESC] Leave Normalize mode and resume Edit.


m Delete Mark Options:

The following commands delete special control marks in the text of your
document:

 S     Deletes all spell marks (?) in the document.
 /     Deletes all block marks in the document.
[ESC]  Returns to Edit without making any deletions.


n Document History:

The following Document History is requested when any document is created:

 Author     The person who wrote this document.  This name provides additional
            information about the document you are writing.  The name can be
            up to twenty characters long, and is displayed in the detailed
            directory.

Some systems keep a System date.  SuperWriter uses this system date if it is
available. If not, you are asked:

 Date       Creation date for this document.  Enter numbers only.  Any other
            characters are ignored.

 Revision   Revision number for this document.  Enter numbers in the range
  Number    of 0-255.  Any other characters are ignored.


q Document Names:

Documents must have a name so that SuperWriter can file and find them again.
A complete "File Name" consists of the following:

1) Drive    = one letter indicating the disk drive containing the document,
              followed by a colon (:).  The drive name is optional.  If it is
              not given, the SuperWriter program automatically looks for the
              document either on the disk where the last document was found
              or on the default document disk.

2) Name     = one to eight characters, with no spaces.  Choose a name you can
              easily remember or associate with the specific document.

3) Extension= a period, followed by three or fewer characters which indicate
              the type of file, such as .DOC or .TXT.  The extension is
              optional.  When you edit a file and save it, the previous version
              of the file is kept with the same drive and name, but with a
              different extension, .BAK (for backup).


r Format Settings:

Left Margin   The column number (0-99) for the left margin.  A left margin of
              ten (the preset value) gives a one inch left margin if you print
              ten-pitch (ten characters per inch) with the print head at the
              left perforation.
Line Width    The number of print columns from the left margin setting to the
              right margin.  The default line width is taken from the Global
              setting for this document.  A line width of 65 and left margin
              of 10 gives a right margin of 10 when printing ten-pitch on
              8 1/2 inch wide paper.
Spacing       The number of spaces between lines.  Any embedded SP formatting
              commands in the file override this setting.
Page size     The number of lines, including top and bottom margins, on each
              page.  Eleven inch long sheets should use a page size of 66 (the
              preset value) if your printer prints six lines per inch.
Top Margin    The number of lines the printer skips at the top of each page
              before printing the text.
Bottom Margin The number of lines the printer leaves at the bottom of each page
              before starting the next page.


s Control Settings:

Copies        The number of copies of the document you want printed.  If you
              ask for multiple copies of form letters, the letters are printed
              in multiple passes, so you will get one complete set of letters,
              then a duplicate set, and so on.
Forms         Either continuous (C) or single (S).  Single forms stop the
              printing after each page so that you can put a new sheet of paper
              in the printer.  If you are printing single pages, press any key
              except [ESC] to continue printing after loading a new sheet.
End Page #    The number of the last page you want printed.
Begin Page #  The first page of the document you want to print.  If you set it
              to "3", the first two pages are skipped and printing starts with
              the third page (numbered 3).  This setting does not affect page
              numbering.  Embed the PG formatting command in the document to
              also change the page number on the pages printed.

**** If SuperWriter is Installed for a specialty printer, you can also set:

Proportional  Select whether this document should be proportionally printed.
Pitch         Select what print pitch (characters per inch) you want.  Pitch
              may be ignored if you are using Proportional printing.


w Disk Full:

The disk does not have enough room to save this document.  You must either
delete files from the disk or save the document on a different disk.

To delete files - [ESC] back to the Edit, press [ESC] [CR] to go to the Main
       Menu, choose the Utilities option, then the Library File Access option,
       and finally the Delete File option of that Menu.  You can
delete extra
       files or backup files to get enough room to save the current document.

To save the document on a different disk - follow the above procedure but
       choose the Reset Disk option of the Library File Access utility.  Switch
       disk drives, specify which drive you switched, and [ESC] back to the
       Save Menu to save the document.


a Function Keys:

After pressing Ctrl-Q, choose:

  1   Edit key Help
  2   Insert mark
  3   Find next mark
  4   Repeat last Find
  5   Repeat last Replace
  6   Find next spelling mark
  7   Delete character
  8   Insert new line
  9   Delete to word end
  0   Delete to line end

