                         REPAIR Utility


     The REPAIR utility is a menu system that assists in  
recovering from a damaged directory.  It will allow the user to  
"put together" file fragments in an attempt to recover whole  
files.  This utility is intended for use by those who understand  
the CP/M file system.

     This utility is invoked by REPAIR <source>: <target>:, where  
<source> is the disk with the damaged directory, and <target> is  
the disk where recovered files can be written.  This utility will  
not write to the <source> disk, only the <target> disk.  When the  
utility is first invoked, there is an option to initialize.  This  
will create two structures.  The first is a list of all available  
data groups (the term group here is used to specify allocation  
group).  This list is maintained in sorted order.  The first  
level of sort is by file name.  All groups not assigned to a file  
are assigned to the file " Unnamed".  The groups assigned to file  
" Unnamed" are sorted in order of the CRC value of the group,  
this will place identical groups next to one another.

     The second structure is a table of file names.  This will be  
initialized to have the two special files " Unnamed" and " junk".   
These two files are special, and can not be written.  If the  
directory of the <source> device contains partial information,  
then this inforamation will be used to make entries in this  
table, and to assign groups to the file in the proper order.

     The main menu also includes options to "classify" and  
"create files".  These will present menus with display of group  
content to facilitate creation of "files", based on file  
fragments.  These "files" can then be written to the target  
device.  The intent of the "classify" option was to easily walk  
through the groups in the " Unnamed" file and assign them to  
named files.  The file " junk" is provided as a trash can for  
unwanted groups.

     The "create files" option will allow you to walk through the  
file fragments, either in sort order, numerical order, or random  
order, and place these fragments in sequence.

     The other main options are self expainitory.  You can write  
out the data structure (actually the two data structures) to a  
file to allow the process to be interrupted and continued at a  
later time.


                  File Manipulation Windows

     Whenever the reapir utility is in the "classify" or "create  
files" mode, the screen is divided into three windows.  The  
upper-most window (the command window) has two lines.  The first  
line is used for input, the second one for error messages.  There  
are two windows directly below this of ten lines each.  The upper  
of these windows is defined as "window-1" and the lower, "window- 
2".  Between the command window and window-1, there is the base  
command input prompt.  The cursor will reside at this location  
when waiting for a command input.

     When the system is in "classify" mode, the upper window will  
be a "file display" window, and the lower window will be a "group  
display" window.  When the system is in "create file" mode, the  
two windows will both be "group display", but the "file display"  
can be toggled.  Let's look at these menus in more detail.   
Although the menus are almost the same in the two modes, there  
are additional capabilities in the "create file" mode of the  
system.

                        Create Mode Menu

 N  Add name to this group         G  Goto Group            F  goto File
^C  Page down one screen           +  Next Group (number)  ^F  Next Group
^R  Page up one screen             -  Prev Group (number)  ^A  Prev Group
^QC Page to bottom of buffer      
^QR Page to top of buffer
 D  toggle Display                ^W  Write file group
 S  Switch to alternate screen     X  Return to main menu


                       Classify Mode Menu

 N  Add name to this group         G  Goto Group            F  goto File
^C  Page down one screen           +  Next Group (number)  ^F  Next Group
^R  Page up one screen             -  Prev Group (number)  ^A  Prev Group
^QC Page to bottom of buffer      
^QR Page to top of buffer
 A  Add group 2 following group 1  P  Peruse file          ^N  File Name disp
 D  toggle Display                ^W  Write file group
 S  Switch to alternate screen     X  Return to main menu


                      File Table Mode Menu

 N  Add file name                  R  Remove file name
^C  Page down
^R  Page up
^QC Page to last file
^QR Page to first file
 X  eXit                           S  Switch to alternate screen



