This DOC file is an addendum to the MONOP89.DOC information to be found
in this same area.  This version is an enhanced version of MONOPOLY-89
and supports both MBASIC on the H/Z-89 under CP/M-80 (haven't tried HDOS),
and MBASIC and PERSONAL BASIC on the H/Z-100, using CP/M-85 or CP/M-86,
or Concurrent CP/M.  Certain program routines were changed to provide
'legal' logic flow, which gave errors under Personal Basic.  Other program
modules were re-written to allow more flexible screen handling and open
the door to other enhancements that may follow.  The help screens were
removed to an external file and made accessible as a command so that
you could read the helps when you really needed it.  On-screen game flow
printout was modified to give a circular screen.  This, coupled with
player highlighting, made following the game progression much easier and
allowed faster participation.  The Ed-A-Sketch graphic commands were
cleaned up, as they notably produce quick but 'dirty' code.  The cash
and asset fields were moved to a permanent location below the playing
board and I removed the cash and asset helps that I previously added.

It is hoped that this version will be looked at, played with, and updated
further by others.  I would not like to become the game 'clearing house'
so if Richard Bacon is willing to continue coordination efforts then my
thanks goes out to him for his efforts.  There is certain to be bugs in
this version, and I analysed the logic of the game to only the degree 
necessary to accomplish my 'requirements'.  I don't believe that I added
any error to the basic program, and I encourage that others would maintain
'legal' logic flow in any changes or enhancements.  This program represents
typical 'spaghetti code' and MBASIC allows all kind of no-no's.

Personal Basic does a thorough job of logic flow analysis before the code
is allowed to execute, and I was surely suprised when errors were flagged
to the effect of 'error - jumps into a loop', when I first started the
conversion.  I recommend it to anyone learning Basic in-depth or those
doing serious development work.  It has exceptional debugging features.
Personal Basic is a product of Digital Research, Inc., and represents a
16-bit 'clone' of MBASIC. (A fitting product from a operating system
company who had their operating system 'cloned' by a basic language
company)

I would like to recommend that someone provide further assistance in
expanding the file WMONOP.VAR, which documents some of the variables
used in this program.

I spent considerable time and perspiration getting the logic created for
the game board position labels.  The algorithms designed to generate the
X/Y relative positions were the result of much mental slavery.  The final
result was a joyful surprise.  (thanks, Lord - my brain survived again)

                                     enjoy...  and watch your language...
    
                                     bob willink

