
Screen Editor                                          97-12-28
-------------

This is the documentation for EDITOR.SCR - the full-screen 
editor.


General screen commands:
------------------------

 EDIT  ( -- u )                                        S

     Enter the full screen editor, selecting screen u for 
     editing.

 WHERE  ( -- )                                         S

     Used after a LOAD error, WHERE performs the same function as 
     EDIT but the screen and the cursor position are 
     automatically set to the location where the error occured.

 L  ( -- )          List                               S

     Lists the current screen.  The screen number is obtained 
     from the variable SCR and is set by LIST, EDIT or when a 
     LOAD error occurs.

 N  ( -- )          Next                               S

     Increments the screen number by one.  Typically used 
     immediately before the L command.

 B  ( -- )          Back                               S

     Decrements the screen number by one.  Typically used 
     immediately before the L command.

 COPY  ( u1 u2 -- )                                    S

     Copy the contents of screen u1 to screen u2.

 COPIES  ( u1 u2 u3 -- )                               S

     Copy a range of screens - u1 is the first source screen, u2 
     is the first destination screen, u3 is the number of screens 
     to be copied. The user is prompted before copying begins.  
     Pressing any key during copy aborts the process.  Overlap of 
     source and destination screens is automatically handled.


Editor commands:
----------------

NOTE: After editing a source screen, ensure the changes are made 
permanent by entering the update command (ctrl-K) before moving 
to another screen or exiting the editor.


1. Cursor movement

Ctrl-E    Move cursor up.

Ctrl-X    Move cursor down.

Ctrl-D    Move cursor right.

Ctrl-S    Move cursor left.

Ctrl-I    Move cursor 4 places to the right (HTAB).

Ctrl-Q    Move cursor to the upper left of the screen.


2. Editing

Ctrl-G    Delete the character to the right of the cursor.

Ctrl-H    Delete the character to the left of the cursor.

Ctrl-T    Erase all characters to the right of the cursor.

Ctrl-O    Insert a space at the current cursor position.

Ctrl-Y    Delete the current line.  Lines below the cursor are 
          moved up one position.  Pop a line from the circular 
          buffer into the bottom line.

Ctrl-N    Insert a blank line.  Lines below the cursor are moved 
          down one position.  Push the bottom line to the 
          circular buffer.

Ctrl-W    Split the current line at the cursor position.

Ctrl-F    Join the next line at the cursor position

Ctrl-A    Copy the contents of the current line to the one-line 
          buffer.

Ctrl-P    Copy the contents of the one-line buffer to the current 
          line.

Ctrl-K    Update all changes made to the screen.


3. Miscellaneous

Ctrl-C    Move to the next screen.

Ctrl-R    Move to the previous screen.

Ctrl-J    Jump to another screen.

Ctrl-Z    Clear the screen or circular buffer.

Ctrl-B    Redraw the screen.

Ctrl-L    Reload the current file block.

Ctrl-V    Toggle between insert or overwrite mode.

Ctrl-U    Exit the editor.
