
CPMUNARJ v 1.0  An .ARJ file extractor for CP/M.

P.R. Hunt. November 1st, 1992

Acknowledgement.  Ideas for this program were gleaned  from  UNARJ.C  2.10
by Robert K. Jung (C) 1991.

Conditions of use:    The  programs  and documentation in this package must 
not be altered in any way.    In particular, the name  Robert  Jung, and my
name must stay in tact in the programs  and  documentation.   I  accept  no   
liability for any problems or claims arising from the use of this program.

This package must be distributed in its entirity.   Otherwise,  use  freely
and distribute liberally!


INTRODUCTION:

This program gives CP/M users access to the contents of  archives  produced
by the ARJ archiver, by R.K. Jung.  The companion program, DARJ.COM,  gives
a complete directory of the files stored in an .ARJ archive.

You need to be running a Z80 CP/M and have lots of TPA (about 53K or more).
The decompression algorithms are quite memory hungry, in CP/M terms anyway,
alone needing more than 39K.  For this reason, the program offers no  fancy
displays or  other "bells and whistles".   If you have insufficient memory,
the  program  will safely abort with a message.  This program  was compiled
under CP/M Plus, but should run under CP/M 2.2.

As a first step, rename the program to something  workable,  for  your  own
convenience.   (But please DON'T change any file names in  the distribution
package.)


COMMAND SUMMARY:

CPMUNARJ can be used in three ways:

	CPMUNARJ
	CPMUNARJ <archive>
	CPMUNARJ E <archive>

Entering just CPMUNARJ from the command line will result in a simple  usage
message being displayed.  

The second command form just provides the names of files  in  the  archive.
(DARJ, the ARJ Directory program, provides a  more  detailed listing of the
archive contents.  See DARJ.COM and DARJ.DOC in the distribution library).

<archive> is the .ARJ archive file, which is of the form:

	[du:]filename[.arj]

Drive/user number designators may be optionally specified.  If a file  name
extension is not given, the extension .ARJ will be assumed.  If the archive
file actually has no file name extension, terminate the file  name  with  a
full stop.  (Although, virtually all archive files have a .ARJ  extension.)
The following are examples of valid archive file names:

	MYARJ.ARJ

	C1:MYARJ

The third command form extracts the contents of  the  ARJ  archive  to  the
current drive and user by default.  You may optionally specify a  different
drive/user to receive extracted files by  placing  a  drive/user  specifier
directly after the E  option  (NO  INTERVENING  SPACES).    The  drive/user
specifier MUST have a TERMINAL COLON (:).  For example,

	CPMUNARJ EC3: MYARJ

extracts files from MYARJ.ARJ to drive C: user 3.

Files extracted from the archive will overwrite existing files of the  same
name on the destination drive/user.  All  files  in  the  archive  will  be
extracted  i.e  you  cannot  specify the extraction of just certain  files.
(See Development Notes below.)


DEVELOPMENT NOTES:

I used HI-TECH C v3.09 for Z80 CP/M to compile this program, on my  Amstrad
PCW running CP/M Plus.  I have modified parts of the HI-TECH object library
package to allow conventional  du:file.ext  specifications,  and  therefore
have not released the source code.

The ability to provide selective extraction may be added later.  Contact me
if this really interests you, because I don't plan to make this program  as
an ongoing project.  (Remember, memory is also tight).  I  do  not  foresee
ARJ becoming a supported CP/M archiving method, and I  would  probably  not
recommend any such attempts.  I think  that  its  memory requirements would 
preclude its use on many CP/M platforms, and would make the development  of
a full featured archiving system most difficult.   My  only  rationale  for
producing CPMUNARJ in the first place was to access  files from a  Bulletin
board which supported CP/M but stored nearly all its files  in .ARJ format.
  
I welcome  your feedback  about  CPMUNARJ.   Comments  about  its   spartan
appearance will be politely ignored!  Contact me:-

Paul Hunt
c/-
ZNODE 62 BBS
Perth, Western Australia.
09-450-0200
(International +619-4500200)

or via the CP/M Technical Echo.

