.PO 14
.PC 26
                WIZARD'S CASTLE GAME
                --------------------

From Jul/Aug 1980 issue of "Recreational Computing".
Original Exidy Sorcerer  version by Joseph R. Power.
Modified Microsoft  BASIC  version  by  J.F.Stetson.
Instructions formatted  in  lower case for 52-column
          Osborne 1 by Alan T. Chattaway.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

     Wizard's  Castle is a fantasy game about  equal 
in complexity to the several versions of "Adventure" 
which are now available for microcomputers and is  a 
very large "BASIC" program in its own right.  Unlike 
adventure,  the  castle is randomly stocked for each 
game,  which means that winning one does not detract 
from playing future games.   At present,  there  are 
verisons  of Wizard's Castle for the Exidy Sorcerer, 
TRS-80,   HP-2000,  Heath  H-8/H-89  and  Osborne  1 
computers.

Background History 
------------------

     Many cycles ago,  in the Kingdom of N'dic,  the 
gnomic  wizard  Zot forged his great Orb  of  Power.  
Soon after doing this,  he vanished,  leaving behind 
his  vast subterranean castle filled  with  esurient 
monsters, fabulous treasures, and the incredible ORB
OF ZOT.                                             

     From  that  time hence,  many a bold youth  has 
ventured into the wizard's castle.  As yet, none has 
ever emerged victorious.

Introduction 
------------

     Wizard's Castle is a computerized simulation of 
one  of the most common and popular fantasy motifs - 
the lone adventurer's quest within an immense under- 
ground labyrinth.   Each game is different from  all 
others,  so  the game is a challenge even after  you 
have won several times.   Each game will result in a 
win  or  a loss,  depending on a player's skill  and 
luck.   The  instructions which follow  explain  the 
rules  and  options of the game.   If at  any  time, 
however,   you   are  not  sure  of  what  to  do  - 
experiment.   The  program  is designed  to  prevent 
invalid inputs.  

Character Creation 
------------------

      At the start of each game, you will be asked a 
number of questions about what type of character you 
will  have.    You  must  make  choices  about   the 
following : 

Race:

     You may be an elf, dwarf, man, or hobbit.  Each 
race  starts  with  a total  of  32  points  (except 
hobbits,  who only get 28), but they are distributed 
differently for each race. 

Sex:

     You  may be male or female.   Both are equal in 
ability  and in the number of points.   Be  creative 
with your response. 

Points:

     Each  character starts with a number of  points 
for  the attributes of Strength  (ST),  Intelligence 
(IQ),  and Dexterity (DX).   In addition,  there are 
some  other points which you may distribute  between 
these three attributes as you wish.  

     Your ST, IQ, and DX may be any number from 1 to 
18.   If  any of the three drops below 1,  you  have 
died.   For  all three attributes,  the  larger  the 
numerical  value,  the better.   Each character also 
starts  the  game with 60 gold  pieces  (GP's)  with 
which  to  purchase  some,   none,  or  all  of  the 
following items : 

Armor:

     You may buy plate armor for 30 GP's,  chainmail 
for 20 GP's,  or leather for 10 GP's.   You can wear 
only  one  suit  of  armor  at  a  time.   The  more 
expensive the armor, the more damage it will absorb.  

Weapon:

     You may buy a sword for 30 GP's,  a mace for 20 
GP's, or a dagger for 10 GP's.  You can only carry a 
single  weapon  at a time.   The more expensive  the 
weapon,  the  more  damage it does  to  the  various 
monsters.  

Lamp:

     If,  after  selecting armor and a  weapon,  you 
have 20 GP's or more left, you may buy a lamp for 20 
GP's.   Having  the lamp will allow you to look into 
an adjacent room without having to enter it. 

Flares:

     If,  after  all other purchases,  you have  any 
money  left,  you  may  buy flares for  1  GP  each.  
Lighting  a  flare reveals the contents of  all  the 
rooms surrounding your current location. 

     Once you have created and equipped a character, 
you  are  ready to enter the castle and  begin  your 
adventures.

The Castle
----------

     The  Castle is arranged as an 8 x 8 x  8  three 
dimensional  matrix.   This  means that there are  8 
levels  with  64 rooms on each  level.   The  castle 
levels are numbered from 1 (the top level) to 8 (the 
bottom  level).   Each castle level  is  constructed 
like  a doughnut in that the north edge is connected 
to the south edge and the east edge is connected  to 
the west edge.   In a similar fashion, the sinkholes 
(explained later) on level 8 will "drop" you down to 
level 1.  The only room which does not function like 
this is the entrance / exit room of the castle which 
is always located at location (1,4) level 1.   Going 
north from this room takes you out of the castle and 
ends the game. 

     Each  room of the castle will have as  contents 
one of the following :

E  the Entrance / Exit room:  an empty room contain-
     ing nothing
U  stairs:  going Up to the level above
D  stairs:  going Down to the level below 
P  a magic Pool from which you may drink 
C  a Chest which you may open 
B  a Book which you may open 
G  from 1 to 10 Gold Pieces 
F  from 1 to 3 Flares 
W  a Warp to another random location 
M  a Monster (one of 12 different types) 
V  a Vendor  which you may attack,  ignore or  trade 
     with 
O  a crystal Orb (this is not the ORB OF ZOT)
S  a Sinkhole (a room with no floor) 
T  a Treasure (one of the 8 in the castle) 

     The  single  letters are the abbreviations  for 
the  room contents which are displayed whenever  you 
look at your map or light a flare.  When you look at 
your map,  the room you are currently located in  is 
bracketed by < >.  

 
Player Commands 
---------------

     Whenever  the program asks for a  command,  you 
must  decide  what action you wish to  perform.   If 
your choice is not valid in your current  situation, 
the  program  will inform you and allow you  to  try 
again.   The  following  is a list of  the  commands 
which the program understands, with a description of 
their effects and restrictions : 

NORTH:   moves you to the room north of your present 
position.   When  you  go north from the entrance  / 
exit room, the game terminates.  In all other cases, 
the north edge wraps around to the south.  

SOUTH:   moves you to the room south of your present 
position.  In all cases, the south edge wraps around 
to the north edge.  

EAST:    moves you to the room east of your  present 
position.   In all cases, the east edge wraps around 
to the west edge.  

WEST:    moves  you to the room west of your present 
position.   In all cases, the west edge wraps around 
to the east edge.

UP:     causes you to ascend stairs going up.  You 
must be in a room containing stairs going up.

DOWN:    causes  you to descend stairs  going  down.  
you  must be in a room containing stairs going down.  

DRINK:   causes  you  to take a drink from  a  magic 
pool.   You may repeat this command as often as  you 
wish,  but  you must be in a room containing a magic 
pool. 

MAP:     causes a map of the level you are currently 
on  to  be  printed.    All  unexplored  rooms   are 
displayed as "?".   All other rooms are displayed as 
their one character abbreviations.   You may look at 
your  map at any time unless you are either blind or 
retreating from a monster.

FLARE:   causes  one  of  your  flares  to  be  lit, 
revealing the contents of all rooms surrounding your 
current  position.   Because each edge is joined  to 
the  opposite edge,  you will always see nine  rooms 
with your location in the center.   Each flare burns 
away  to nothing.   You may light flares as long  as 
you  have some and you are not blind  or  retreating 
from a monster.  For those who are familiar with any 
of the common "Star Trek" games,  a flare works much 
like  a long range sensor scan with the addition  of 
wraparound.

LAMP:    allows  you to shine your lamp into any one 
of the rooms north,  south,  east,  or west of  your 
current  position,  revealing  the room's  contents.  
Unlike flares, the lamp may be used repeatedly.  You 
may use your lamp at any time unless you don't  have 
a lamp, are blind, or are retreating from a monster.  

OPEN:  causes you to open a book or a chest which is 
in the room with you.  

GAZE:   causes you to gaze into a crystal orb.  When 
you  see yourself in a bloody heap,  you lose 1 or 2 
points  of strength.   When you see the location  of 
the ORB OF ZOT ,  there is only a 50% chance that it     
is correct.   You cannot gaze when you are blind  or 
when you are not in a room containing a crystal orb.  

TELE-:    allows  you  to teleport directly  into  a 
specific  room anywhere in the castle.   This is the 
only  way  to enter the room containing the  ORB  OF 
ZOT.                                         

You must have the Runestaff in order to teleport.  

QUIT:    allows  you to end the game while  you  are 
still  in  the  castle.   You will be asked  if  you 
really want to quit,  in case you made a mistake  or 
want  to change your mind.   If you quit,  you  will 
lose the game. 

HELP:    causes a summary of the available commands, 
abbreviations  used  in describing the  contents  of 
rooms,  and  the benefits of possessing each of  the 
treasures  to  be displayed at any time  during  the 
game. 

     All  of  the commands,  except  DRINK,  can  be 
abbreviated to their first letter (M for MAP,  Q for 
QUIT, etc.).  The abbreviation for DRINK is "DR" (to 
distinguish it from "D" for the DOWN command). 

Magic Spells 
------------

     Whenever  your Intelligence (IQ) becomes 15  or 
higher, you gain the option to cast a magic spell on 
a  monster if you have the very first combat option.  
The three spells and their effects are as follows : 

WEB:  traps  the monster in a sticky web so that  it 
      can't fight back as you attack it.  This spell 
      lasts  from  2 to 9 turns and  costs  you  one 
      strength (st) point. 

FIRE- hits  the  monster with a ball of  flame  that 
      causes between 2 and 14 points worth of damage 
      instantly.   It  costs one strength point  and 
      one intelligence point. 
 
DEATH-is  a contest of wills between the monster and 
      yourself.    Whoever's  spell  has  the  lower 
      intelligence dies at once.   It costs  nothing 
      to use, but it is very risky.  Even with an IQ 
      of 18 (the highest possible), you still have a 
      25% chance of being killed.

Treasures, Curses, Blindness, and such
--------------------------------------

In the castle are eight randomly placed treasures : 

The RUBY RED - wards off the curse of lethargy.
The PALE PEARL - wards off the curse of the leech.
The OPAL EYE - cures blindness. 
The GREEN  GEM  - wards off the curse of  forgetful-
      ness.
The BLUE  FLAME  - dissolves  books  stuck  to  your 
      hands.
The NORN STONE - has no special power.  
The PALANTIR - has no special power.
The SILMARIL - has no special power.  

There are three curses : 

LETHARGY - this gives the monsters the first  attack 
      which   prevents  you  from  bribing  them  or 
      casting spells on them. 

LEECH - this  takes from 1 to 5 GP's from  you  each 
      turn until you have no gold pieces left.  

FORGETFULNESS  - this causes you to forget what  you 
      know  about the castle.   Your map will slowly 
      return to all question  marks.   However,  the 
      contents  of  the rooms in the castle are  the 
      same.  

      In  addition to nullifying the effects of  the 
curses,  the treasures also provide protection  from 
two  undesirable  things which can happen  when  you 
open a book.   These are going blind, which prevents 
you  from seeing your maps,  lighting flares,  using 
your lamp,  gazing into orbs,  and being informed of 
your present location, and secondly, having the book 
stick to your hands,  which prevents you from  using 
your  weapon  to fight monsters (you can still  cast 
spells at them if you are smart enough, however).

Vendors 
-------

      On  every  level  in  the  castle,  there  are 
vendors  who  are  more than  willing  to  sell  you 
various items at grossly inflated prices.  Normally, 
the  vendors  will  make  you  an  offer  for  every 
treasure you have, and then, depending on the amount 
of  gold you have,  will sell you new armor,  a  new 
weapon,   potions  of  strength,   intelligence  and 
dexterity  (no matter how many potions you buy,  the 
maximum  amount of these attributes you can have  is 
18), and a lamp, if you don't already have one.

      If  you choose to attack a  vendor,  you  will 
then antagonize every vendor in the castle, and they 
will  all react like monsters.   You will also  lose 
the  ability to trade with them.   Killing a vendor, 
however, will give you new plate armor, a sword, one 
of  each kind of potion,  and a lamp (if  you  don't 
have one), in addition to his hoard of between 1 and 
1000   gold   pieces.    To  end   hostilities   and 
reestablish  trading privileges,  you must bribe any 
vendor  in  the  castle with  the  treasure  of  his 
choice. 

Monsters and the Runestaff 
--------------------------

There are 12 types of monsters in the castle : 

     Kobold,  Orc,  Wolf, Goblin, Ogre, Troll, Bear, 
Minotaur, Gargoyle*, Chimera, Balrog, Dragon* 

     *Please  note  that  each  time  you  strike  a 
gargoyle  or a dragon,  there is a possibility  that 
your weapon will be shattered.  

     Each  monster  possesses a hoard of from  1  to 
1000  gp's  which  you  obtain  when  you  kill  the 
monster.   In  addition,  one  of  the  monsters  is 
carrying  the  Runestaff (you won't know  which  one 
until you kill it).   You must have the Runestaff to 
teleport, but when you teleport into the castle room 
which  contains the ORB OF ZOT,  the Runestaff  will                    
vanish  (you must find your way to the  castle  exit 
without it).  

Warps and the ORB OF ZOT
------------------------

     All  but one of the rooms denoted as "W" really 
are warps, and walking, falling, or teleporting into 
them  will  cause  you to move to any  room  in  the 
castle  at random.   The exception is the ORB OF ZOT 
which  is  disguised as a Warp - walking  into  this 
room  always causes you to move one room further  in 
the  same direction.   To actually enter this  room, 
you must use the Runestaff to teleport in.   At this 
point,  you will acquire the great ORB OF ZOT,  and                           
the  Runestaff will vanish.   To win the  game,  you 
must leave the castle with the ORB OF ZOT.  Remember
that crystal orbs are not the ORB OF ZOT and  cannot 
be picked up.  

Error Messages
--------------

     Any  time  you receive a message starting  with 
"**",  it  means that the last thing you  typed  was 
unacceptable  to  the  program at  that  time.   For 
instance,  if  you get the message  "** IT'S HARD TO 
GAZE WITHOUT AN ORB.",  this means that you tried to 
gaze  from  a room which did not contain  a  crystal 
orb.   You  are  always required to redo  your  last 
response when you receive an "**" type message.  

     Good luck, and beware! 


****************************************************
