Johnny's P.D. game #2, PacPerson R2.0
Manual/release note, January, 1991.
(If there is any copyright violation here, please let me know!)

Special thanks to:  David Goodenough, Ralph Becker-Szendy,
Larry Moore, and Ronn for testing out for me!

This is a follow-up to Tetris R2.0 for CP/M-Z80.  PacMan has
always been my favorite game; we once chose Atari 2600 over
Intellivision system only because PacMan was available for Atari,
and not for Intellivision, despite the obvious "superiority" of
the "I" machine.  (Old-days version of choosing Nintendo over
Genesis to get Mario Bros... or MS-DOS over CP/M to...  Hmmmm...
Wouldn't you know it; I'm stuck.)  So, I figured, if a fair
version of PacMan existed for CP/M, everyone would be using CP/M,
and that's my contribution to this society and the world at large.
(Why this is called PacPerson, rather than PacMan, is explained in
the "peculiarities" section below.)

As I mention in the manual for Tetris R2.0, I had completely
rewritten the code for Tetris so that the subroutines can be used
for writing other games, as most real-time interactive computer
games tend to rely on similar principles.  The code for PacPerson
is a major modification over Tetris, but the subroutines used for
Tetris sure made my life easier as I pursued the project.

The sad fact is, due to some irregularities in my life, I did not
work on this for the past few months.  The majority of the code
was written in the spring of 1990, and I was able to play decent
games (that included EVERYTHING in this version except for some
options and the bonus pills) since June.  I just spent three more
weekends (Dec. 1990 - Jan. 1991) to make it what it is now.

Although this is the first "formal" release version, I numbered it
2.0 so that it is more or less in synch with the versions of
Tetris floating around.  (I did send a copy of an earlier version
to a couple of people.)  I intend to update all of the games (yeah,
all two of them) whenever I can so the features available for each
game runs parallel to one another.

I am sure everyone is familiar with the concept behind PacPerson,
so I will not elaborate too much here.  In short, the PacPerson
symbolizes the greed and insatiable, adaptive desires of the
modern Bourgeoisie, who endeavors to take over the world-at-large
(or such as it is limited by human capacity) and devour everything
in its way.  The Proletariat will attempt to break away from their
confines and use their moral superiority to devour the Bourgeoisie
in turn, yet the Bourgeoisie controls certain key elements of the
society which can be used to control the Proletariat, and return
them to the dictates of... (Can't you tell I've been a poli-phil
major too long?  It sounds like this throughout this document, so
beware!)

Hmmmm... makes sense, doesn't it?  Unfortunately, there are more
Proletariat than Bourgeoisie in the world, so the game had to be
oriented around the Bourgeoisie; i.e., I let you control one
Bourgeoisie being chased (which is difficult enough) rather than
the four Proletariat chasing.  And, it is your mission to maintain
the persistence of the evil of Capitalism!  Oi.

In simpler words, try to eat up all of the dots.  Try to avoid the
"ghosts" of revolution, as, when you come in contact with them, you
simply die.  You are given three extra lives, with more to come
every 1,000 points (since history of class struggle is not a story
of one individual but many individuals passing on the baton...
Something like that).

When you eat one of the "pills," you attain the capacity to kill
the ghosts as well.  The ghosts notice this and try to run away
from you, turning "blue" in the face.  But, soon they turn into
the unstable "white" state as your powerpill wears out, and
everything eventually comes back to normal.

Occasionally, a "bonus pill" will wander (or stand) around the
game field. Depending on how far you have come through the game,
eating the bonus pill will give you some extra points.

The game field itself is organized 30-by-24.  The screen display
is designed so that it can be played on a 40-column machine.

-----------------------------
PECULIARITIES OF THIS VERSION
-----------------------------

When I was putting together the manual for Tetris R2.0, I decided
against giving out ALL the important, usual strategic pointers,
which have become my second nature over the hours of intensive
development and "testing."  It is not because I am selfish or that
I want you to suffer before you learn (like what Japanese
Blacksmiths are infamous for).  It's just that nothing will make
sense if you don't know the game already, and if you do, you know
it all.

However, to help you get used to some "implementation-specific"
elements, here are some peciliarities of this particular
derivative of PacMan.  Some of the configurations can be altered
during or before the game, but some cannot.  For all configurable
variables, when the program is first loaded, the "options" screen
will display the values that I recommend for a "decent" and
"normal" game; except for speed, which will be set to the slowest
level. The bonus pill mode also reflects my "purely" personal
preference, not a recommendation.

Non-configurable variables can be altered with simple hacking, and
I will make the source code available to anyone who wants it.

-Characters
@  is the PacPerson, you, the capitalist pig.
.  is the worldly good made abundant by Nature and History.
o  is the tool of oppression with which you dominate the Proletariat.
   (the "powerpill")
+  is the occasional treasure which is of no intrinsic value, but
   which attains certain meaning for the owning class of a Capitalist
   society. (the "bonus pill")

Following are our Proletariat Heroes:
B  Blinky (sometimes referred to as Binky)
P  Pinky
I  Inky (Bonnie, if you want a sexually-balanced working class;
   and if you believe in name-gender correlation)
C  Clyde
X  when they are running away from the private militia of the...
   ("blue")
?  when they are still running away, but beginning to reclaim
   their initial state of power ("white"; blinks in original
   PacMan derivatives)
"  their heroic state of martyrdom, seeking to regain their
   strength by going underground and reaffirming their
   strategies... ("dead"; eyeballs)

Note that if you eat the powerpill while the ghosts are still in
the "dead" stage ('"'), the dead ghosts will go back to their home
and become "normal" even if your pill has not worn out.  This is
the same in the arcade version, and, of course, has some strategy
implications.

-Scoring
Each "dot" will give you one point.  Eating the powerpill will
give you ten points initially, and, as you chase the ghosts, you
will get 20, 40, 80, 160 successively.  The score gain is reset to
20 if you eat the powerpill before the previous one wears out.  (I
don't know what the arcade version does. Never got that far...
Tell me if you know.)

The bonus pill will give you 10, 20, 50, 70, 100, 150, 200, 300,
and 500 points for each successive "screen," independent of the
speed level.  500 is maximum.  (Agian, tell me what the arcade
version does.)

An extra life is given every 1,000 points.

-Speed
As in Tetris, there are, well, 99 levels, although after the 20th
level (depending on the speed of your machine), there is
absolutely no difference.  The higher the number, the faster
everybody moves.  The speed increases by one level with each
successive screen.  I consider "5" to be a fair value for my
dexterity; the program will set it to level "0," the slowest, when
first loaded, so you can make your way up.  If you forget to
change it, you can increase it while playing - which allows for
further adjustment in case of misjudgement.  If you find the
initial value annoying (which I just began to), just hack it.
You cannot slow down, tho'.

The "blue" and "white" ghosts and the bonus pill move slower than
the PacPerson, which moves slower than the normal ghosts.  The
relative speed between the figures DO NOT change throughout the
game.  This is something that can be changed in later versions;
the concept is that the difficulty increasing with the demands on
the dexterity makes more sense than the player moving at a fixed
velocity while the ghosts move at exponentially faster speeds.

I was told also that in the arcade version, the "cornering speed"
of the ghosts are slightly lower than the PacMan's, which allows
the player to get oneself away from the chasing menaces by
changing the direction as often as possible.  I did not implement
this in this version, since I didn't see it to be that exciting a
feature.  However, as the movements of the ghosts have elements of
randomness in them, the more you corner, more likely you will
"lose" the ghosts, just like in the movies.  It's not the car;
it's the driver.  (Also, it's not the engine; it's the suspension
system.)

-Randomness
Despite what I just said, the basic philosophy behind all of my
game writing is that everything be as configurable as possible. A
friend of mine suggested that the degree of randomness in the
movement of the ghosts and the bonus pill is more pertinent to the
difficulty than is the speed.  I agreed with that point, but could
not figure out a way to effectively and fairly combine the two
changes in difficulty as the level goes up.  So, I decided to have
one of them "held" throughout the game, and the other increasing
as the game progresses.  The player can decide what level of
challenge one would like; less random it is, more difficult it is.
You can also turn the randomness completely off, which makes life
surely interesting.  I recommend 53% randomness ("8"), although
75% randomness ("11") may be more suitable for beginners.  Note
that even when the randomness is set to "0," there is some amount
of randomness, such as when there's a wall between you and the
ghost and the ghost has to choose which way to go.  I didn't
want to bother with "shortest route" algorithms.  (Approximate
percentage randomness = randomness / 15 * 100.  For source code
hackers: the randomness is referred to as "difficulty" in the
source code for some obvious/historic reasons...)

Unlike in some of the versions I saw (one being "PCMan" written
for PC-compatibles), the ghosts will never "turn around."  They
will either make a turn left or right, or go straight ahead, like
in the arcade version.  This has some interesting implications for
strategy and such, one of them being that with 100% randomness,
the only way you will die is if the ghost has no choice but to
bump right into your face.  This can happen in the corners the
most often - when you "trap yourself" - and also in "long alleys"
where the ghosts will just have to keep following you and
eventually catch up.  You'll see what I mean.

-The Bonus Pill
The major triumph of this version is its "agenderality."  No real
political implications here (or anywhere in this document!).  It is
NOT with some pseudo-feminist political correctness that I named
this game "PacPerson."  It is simply that this version incorporates
two major members of the PacMan family: the original PacMan and
Ms. PacMan.  The only difference that I perceived between the two,
aside from the silly, degrading, and genderizing bow on Ms.
PacMan's head/body and the arrangement of the game field, was the
fact that the bonus pill "moves around" in Ms. PacMan, and "stays
put" in the original.  In the spirit of configurability, I did not
want people to have to chose between the male and the female
version of the same... uh... well... story of class struggle.
(Yeah, yeah!)  Or, rather, I wanted the player to chose and
alternate between the two, rather than ME doing the deciding.

So, the "staying" bonus pill will stay put where it belongs, and
the "moving" bonus pill will be moving around where it belongs!
The configuration cannot be altered during the game, as that will
make the game into a "different" game.  (It's easy to implement,
tho', so maybe in a later version.)  The program sets to "moving"
on load-up, to reflect my preference; it's just more interesting
and easier. If you don't like it, again, hack it.

If you die or complete the screen while the bonus pill is around,
the staying pill will remain there, but the moving pill will
disappear.  I was bent on keeping them both around no matter
what, but the moving pill hovering around as the screen resets
just looked a little silly.  (I'd like to hear your opinions on
this, of course.)

-the duration of the pills
The powerpills and the bonus pills (staying) last exactly the same
amount of time.  The moving bonus pill moves at the same speed as
the blue/white ghosts, until it disappears into the tunnels.
Again, in the spirit of configurability, you can alter the
difficulty of the game by selecting the duration of those pills,
but the configuration cannot be altered during the game.  I
recommend "three pills," or about thirty blue-ghost steps.

--------
PATCHING
--------

Please, please note that this is written for Z80.  I believe that
Intel engineers totally lack something of a creative imagination.
8080 was at its time quite an innovation, but that shouldn't
prevent me from calling it "stuck-up."  This tendency is still
manifest in the iAPX 86 family.  Actually, they are TOO
imaginative with their processor designs.  Why not make things
simpler and more general, for my sake!  (I did not, however, use
that many "exclusively Z80" instructions, so it should be easy to
convert it to 8080 if you have to.  After all, I must admit, Z80
is only a slight improvement over 8080.)

The package is configured for a TVI-920-compatible terminal.  But,
any terminal that has cursor addressing and clear-screen (you
know, like all of the terminals?!) can be used.

To make patching easier, I used David Goodenough's QTerm Patching.
David is quite a productive programmer, so I suggest you keep a
complete QTerm.pat around for your terminal.  Who knows; at the
rate at which my life is going, I might end up writing a dozen
games by the time I find a real career.  (For Tetris owners: no, I
wrote only two games since the beginning of my Division III.)
Besides, Rogue and Wanderer are also available for use with
QTerm.pat.  You should be able to get one from many BBS's, as well
as the SIMTEL archive at the White Sands Missile Range.

If you don't know where to get a QTerm.pat, write one yourself.
	ORG	0100h	;DO NOT touch the following five lines
	JP	0506h	;beginning of the program
	JP	0006h	;BIOS keyboard status routine
	JP	0009h	;BIOS keyboard input routine
	JP	000Ch	;BIOS screen out routine
			;an appropriate value (the content of 0002h)
			; is added to the above three to get the
			; BIOS addresses.
	JP	0500h
;
	ORG	01CEh
	DB	4	;CPU clock speed in MHz, rounded up.  Crucial.
;
	ORG	01D0h
	DB	'Name of your terminal', 00h
;
	ORG	01F0h
	DB	'String for Clear Screen', 00h
;
	ORG	0200h
;	routine to move the cursor to
;	   row (y) = H
;	   col (x) = L
;	not to go over 022Eh
	RET

should be enough to run with PacPerson.  Whether this works with
QTERM, I refuse to tell :-).  Assemble this and patch this to
P20.COM using DDT or whatever you have.  The main code starts at
0506h and ends a bit before 1900h. (Tetris was 1500h.) I think
"SAVE 24 B:filename.ext" should be good enough.  See TVI920.PAT or
ANSI.PAT for details (or, just more English).

Or, you can tell me your terminal type and the controls, and I'll
be glad to patch it for you!  (You can even customize keystrokes
that way.)

-------
CONTROL
-------

This program allows "type ahead."  That is, when a key is pressed,
it is immediately decoded (at the very next loop), and the
corresponding command is stored.  Only when the interval timer is
"up," the command is honored: if the figure is at a spot where it
is possible to execute the command (e.g., turn), it executes it;
if it is not possible, it attempts to continue in the same
direction (i.e., move straight ahead); and, if neither is
possible, the figure stays.  This helps very much at higher
speeds and for beginners who wouldn't quite know when exactly to
press the key; I have seen many games, especially hand-held, where
the keystroke could not be either too early or too late.  With
systems with huge key-in buffers, I suggest you try not to keep
your finger (or whatever body part you use) on the keyboard, as it
may "spill over" and not let the program decode a command until
too late, although the type-ahead will more or less take care of
this.

One problem is that at very low speeds, you may enter more than
one keystrokes before the timer is up (before the figure takes a
step) and only the last will be honored.  The impression may be
that the command is lost.  It is not: simply, the commands are not
"queued" but only "stored."  Or, rather, the figure DOES move, but
not visibly, as it would be on a graphics-terminal version with
smooth movements.

Another problem is that you cannot make the figure "stop" by
"centering the joystick."  This is also a drag in the arcade
version, but I didn't give much thought to fixing it - with my
keyboard, which is interrupt-driven AND queued, "stop" command
cannot be implemented except by adding a keystroke.  With
"real-time" keyboards, the player will be forced to keep the
finger on the keyboard to keep the figure moving, which is
something I would like to avoid - too tiring, difficult for
timing, and not good for keyboards and hard-tempered players.
Unlike in some versions (arcade?), you won't be forced to turn, so
when you need/want to stay somewhere, snug into a corner.

I have considered many different ways of implementing the control
processing, and all of them takes a little getting used to.  I
just chose "decode-first, execute-later" because it seemed to make
the most sense and is easiest to learn.  For instance, queuing
will overflow easily with keyboards with very high scan/repeat
rates or when the key stays pressed.  This also emulates real-time
joysticks the best; normally, the status of a joystick is read at
the very moment the timer is up, except that, in my
implementation, the timing doesn't have to be exact - for many
keyboards, mine being one, reading the key that is pressed at one,
single moment is not an easy task, if at all possible.  The
flexibility and type-ahead are helpful when you are kinda' tired -
like when I lose all concentration and patience after hours of
programming - and when you have a huge burrito in the other hand.

Simply put, please just "touch type."

(Thanks to Ralph B.-S. for reminding me to put this in.)

------

Key layout is something that I definitely need more input on.  I
wanted to maintain compatibility with David Goodenough's Wanderer
and Rogue, but it took me too long to learn those controls.  It
was okay with Wanderer, since I had to think a lot with each move,
but it was hell with Rogue when I ran into a room-full of pesky
monsters.  Just imagine the pain in a real-time game.  So, in both
Tetris and PacPerson, I followed the general, conventional
personal-computer-game conventions.  I am hoping to allow both
layouts in the next versions so the player can choose, as I do
realize that the wanderer/rogue layout is quite a common one.  I
couldn't do it this time because I used "S" for sound in Tetris,
and wanted to maintain version-number compatibility while keeping
the control key groups as far away from one another as possible. I
also have concerns for people who are left-handed; I couldn't
figure out a good one as most numeric keypads are far to the right
of the keyboard, and the top row of the letters slant to the left,
making the "up" key icky to reach.  The use of the bottom two rows
is not any better, as the slant is usually one-half of the width
of the thingies.  This is where the wanderer/rogue layout makes
more sense.  Please let me know what you think.

If you have a numeric keypad, use 4 and 6 to move the PacPerson
left and right, and 8 and 5/2 for up and down.  (I hope your
keyboard is not "backward," like the telephones...)  I recommend
that you NOT get used to using "5" for "down," as I have some
other plans for the key in other games; namely, Centiped.

For others, I let I, J, K, and L (caps or not) do the same thing.
If you don't like it, let me know.  This may also be a better
layout than the numeric keypad for many people.

"S" controls the sound; so no one can tell what you are up to.
(Or, for when you have the need to express how upset you are with
your co-occupants.  "!!!" will do the trick.)

CTRL-S pauses the game until another key is pressed.

CTRL-C quits the game, as in "JP 0000," dead warm boot.  CTRL-C
can be used at any time the program is running (unless a glitch
forces it into an infinite loop; hasn't happened, yet).

CTRL-R redraws the screen.  CTRL-R works for both the game screen
and the "options" screen.  (A feature that is common on real
computers like CP/M and most mainframes, and which I miss a lot
when using Mac's and PC's...)

'^' increases the (speed) level by one, in case you find it too
slow.  On my keyboard, this is way up in the upper left corner,
making it tedious to reach.  Sorry, you can't go back down.

The level will go up to 99, even after the interval is set down to
zero.

-------------------
FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS
-------------------

Although I wanted to leave as many things up to the player's
discretion as possible, I did have to make quite a few decisions
so the "options" screen will not be so cluttered.  If you find
any such decisions to be somewhat inadequate or inflexible,
please let me know.  I will also be asking around for opinions
before the next round of revisions.

The possible improvements I can think of now are:

- copyright acknowledgements....  Of course, my weakest point.

- options to change relative speed of the characters.

- different "cornering speed" for the ghosts.

- option to change randomness, bonus pill mode, pill duration,
  etc., while playing the game.  This is just an option, not quite
  an "improvement."  (Option to let the player have an option,
  that is...)

- a better keyboard assignment.  I just need to do some
  experiments.  Any suggestions?  As I write more games, I will
  have a better idea as to what a "general" layout can be.  R3.0,
  if ever made, will reflect this.

- the "half-time" show!  The arcade version plays an impressive
  show of the PacMan and the ghosts chasing one another every few
  screens.  I initially had plans to insert it into the code, but
  haven't gotten to it.  I thought it would be neat and
  interesting.

- the "super pacman" feature.  Just imagine our little bugger
  jumping around and across the ghosts!  A bit difficult
  on the two-dimensional field, but doable.

- a "screen editor."  Like Wanderer and other such games, you
  can play the same, fun PacPerson on a variety of challenging
  screens.  I hope to include a field editor in the program
  one of these days.

- a "patch editor."  Most good programs come with an easy-to-use
  terminal configuration editor.  Just a neat idea.  Great for
  non-programmers (any?) or those without a good assembler.

- more comprehensive hacking instructions.  It would be nice
  if I could simply provide info such as "change nnnn to bb
  in order to..."  It is just that I modify the code so often -
  in simple ways, such as adding a byte or two here and there -
  that such recommendations will not last too long.  I will
  eventually rearrange the code so it is okay (not an easy
  thing to do with the editor I use), and, until then, have the
  source code always available to anybody who wants it.

- a double-character option for 80-columners.  One persistent
  complaint I have been hearing about Tetris is how narrow the
  screen is and the tendency of the figures to elongate
  vertically.  I did figure out a simple way of making "doubling"
  possible, so I may implement that.  But, I will maintain the
  40-column format for those of us less fortunate.  (I can always
  ship the source code with pointers, so just drop me a line.)

- spelling mistakes?  Tell me if you found one here.

- cutting down on the rhetorics in this document.  It makes it
  sound like I'm a Marxist or something.  Disclaimer:  I spit on
  the grave of Marx; I spit on the grave of Hegel.  I was thinking
  about Foucaultian alternatives, or linking it to South Africa,
  or toning up the feminist rhetoric... but Marxist language fits
  so neatly!  Besides, without the rhetoric, the game totally
  lacks a purpose.  Maybe in a later version or for a different
  game...  Me:  I'm still an idealistic, pseudo-anarchist-
  symphathizing, nihilist, young flounderer.  (And Daddy wants me
  to be a lawyer?!)  Wanna help me out?

  Come to think of it, Tetris lacks a purpose, too!  Well, let's
  see...  How about "it symbolizes the people's struggle to
  turn the central power's attempts to impose a structure around
  them into a means towards the dismantling of the power itself."
  Hey, I like that... whatever you think is appropriate.  I like
  "to avoid becoming a mental slave of my Thesis project" better,
  tho'.

- a highscore thingie file.  I think I mention in the
  documentation for Tetris that I didn't think a highscore file
  would be appropriate.  So many factors can be changed so easily
  that "objective" (if this be at all a viable concept) comparison
  is close to impossible and is definitely impractical.  Besides,
  a more proper mode of comparison would be NOT the score, but how
  many screens you've managed to pass without dying once, or how
  many screens you can do overall.  I'm ecstatic to get to screen
  5 with the initial three lives, beginning from level 5 and
  randomness of 8 and three pills; or, I try to catch all the
  ghosts at least once per screen; or, reach every 1,000 points
  fast enough to keep myself going; or, catch all of the moving
  bonus pills; etc., etc., etc.  Like a good self-motivated
  person, set a goal for yourself, and try to achieve it; then, you
  can raise the stake.  Also try it at different times of the day or
  days of the week.  A good monitor of self-improvement.

- a blatant way of asking for money.  Much as I wrote this program
  for my own benefit and that only, if it benefits other people,
  maybe I should demand something, but it's just not in my blood...
  With Tetris, I didn't ask for anything fearing copyright
  problems and such, but, hey, if you think I'm worth it,
  give me something...  I could really use it, you know.

  I am still in that stage of life where $20 represents a major
  financial windfall...  whatever your pocketbook feels
  comfortable with in that general range will be infinitely
  appreciated.  (I am usually more than happy with flatteries and
  "I'm addicted" stories.)

  Still, this is NOT written to be "shareware."  I absolutely
  condemn and loathe that concept.  Please, copy and modify and
  distribute freely as you wish, and, most of all, enjoy!!!

If you have any other ideas or comments, please let me know.  For
academic year 1990-91 I can be reached at:

	JShin@HampVMS.bitnet (we don't have any other Net, yet)

	413-549-4600, ext. 517 (Western Mass.)
	82-2-739-4539 (that's Korea, you know.)

	John Juncholl Shin
	Alumni Relations Office
	Hampshire College
	Amherst, MA 01002-5001
(The post office here will forward mail even if I don't work here
any more.)

After that, who knows?
