                               THE KAYPRO ARTIST                         
                               by Scott Reinhart                   
                                     1986


	The program ARTIST was written in Turbo Pascal for the Kaypro 2-84 
computer and the Epson RX80 printer.  It is a drawing program that uses the 
numeric keypad to draw directly on the newer Kaypro's screen using the 160
by 100 graphic pixels.  These drawings can then be dumped directly to the 
Epson printer using its graphic mode.  The drawings can also be saved and
loaded from files.

	There are three files: 

	1) ARTIST.COM is the compiled version of the program.  It was compiled
                      using Turbo Pascal Version 2.0.

	2) ARTIST.PAS is the source listing for ARTIST.COM.  It contains all
                      of the graphic procedures for both the computer and
                      printer.  It has been documented to make it easy for
                      the user to modify it as needed.

   	3) ARTIST.DOC is the document file you are reading now.

	Note: the files ARTIST.COM and ARTIST.PAS are squeezed.  They will have
to be unsqueezed before they can be used.

	ARTIST consists of two parts, a help menu and a drawing screen.  The
help menu contains a list of all the commands that are supported and is divided
into two sections; Drawing commands and Utility commands.


DRAWING COMMANDS:

	These commands are only active when in the drawing screen.  They are
invoked by typing the appropriate letter at the keyboard.  They are:

	D : Begin drawing.  This turns on the pixel drawing mode.  The cursor
	    will now leave a trail of pixels behind it as it moves.

	E : Begin erasing.  This turns on the pixel erasing mode.  The cursor
  	    will now erase pixels as it moves.

 	M : Move cursor.  This allows the cursor to be moved around the screen
	    without affecting any of the existing pixels.

	B : Blank screen.  Clears the entire screen and moves the cursor to
	    the home position.

	H : Help menu.  Displays the Help menu.

	The cursor is moved about the drawing screen with the numeric keypad.
Continuous movement is done by holding a key down.  Pressing a key once will
move the cursor one pixel.  The layout is:

                                      up

                                  7    8    9
                        left      4         6    right
                                  1    2    3

                                     down


UTILITY COMMANDS:

	These commands are only active when the Help menu is displayed.  They
too are invoked by typing the appropriate letter at the keyboard.  They are:

	P : Print the drawing screen.  Prints the current drawing screen on
	    the printer by first turning on the graphics mode, printing the
            screen and then turning off the graphics mode.

  	R : Return to the drawing screen.  This leaves the Help menu and
	    restores the drawing screen from the array that it is stored
	    in.  This is a slow process so be patient.

	S : Save drawing screen.  Saves the current drawing screen to a file
	    on the disk.  It will prompt the user for a file name and tell if
	    it is a new file or not.  Use the form <d:filename.typ> to specify
	    other than the default drive.

	L : Load drawing screen.  This loads the drawing screen from a file
	    on disk.  If the file cannot be found, it will issue an error
	    message to that effect.  Use the form <d:filename.typ> to specify
	    other than the default drive.

	Q: Quit program.  Exits the program without saving the current drawing
	   screen.  Be sure to save anything before you exit.


	I hope you enjoy ARTIST.  For the more adventurous amoung you, there
are several additions that could be made to it.  Things such as speeding up
the drawing screen restoring with in line assembly code, the ability to draw
more than one screen at a time by scrolling and adding text capability as
well as graphics.

	Have fun...
						Scott Reinhart
than one screen at a time by scrolling and adding text capability as
well as graphics.

	Have fun...
						Scott Rei