NOTE TO:  Mr. A. Lincoln

FROM:  SPELLGUARD SALESMAN


Dear Mr. President:

     I have obtained a portion of your recent address so kindly provided
by your staff.  It seems that some errors have crept into the typing. I 
would like to suggest that SPELLGUARD could save the staff considerable
time in document preparation.   The accurate documents might even improve
the image of your office, which has been called to question in certain 
parts of the country.

     I enclose the following section from your letter:
      

    'Forescore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this contin-
ent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dediacted to the proposition 
that all men are created equal.   Now we are engaged in a great civvil war, testing whether that nation or
any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure.  We are met on a
great battle field of that war.  We have come to dedicate a portion of that
field, as a final engaged place for those who here gave their lives that 
that nation might live.  It is altogehter fitting and proper that we should 
do this.   But, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate; we can not consecrate; we 
cannot hallow this ground.  The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here
and consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract.  The world will
little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget
what they did here.  It is rather to us to be here dedicated to the
unfinished work for which they and fought here have thus far so 
honestly advnaced. It is rather to us to be here dedicated to the great 
task remainaing before us; that from these honored dead we take 
increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full
 measure of devotion; that we here highly resolve that these dad shall 
not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new 
birth of freeedom; and that government of the people, by the people, 
and for the people shall not persish from the earth.'


					Sincerely,



					
