
	   How to Automate Boot-Up of a CP/M Computer
	by Donald Phillipson, Ottawa, rev. 13 March, 1988

While written for Kaypro users, this information ought to be
usable on any computer using CP/M 2.2;  if CP/M 3.0 differs in
any of its addresses, the adaptation should be simple.

CP/M computers can be instructed to perform a whole series of
commands on boot-up by:
	1 	a .SUB file of commands,
	2 	executed by an autoload command.

The autoload command can be written in either of two ways:

	1	By an appropriate option in a disc preparation
	programme such as option C = Command of the Kaypro
        COPY.COM or option #8 of the Advent TURBOCFG command.  
        These options invite you to key in the command string you
        like and write it correctly in the right place.

	2	The command may also be written directly on the
        system tracks of a disc by DU or any other byte editor
        that can reach those tracks.   (File-oriented byte
        editors such as EDFILE cannot do this.)  The command can
        be moved from one disc to another by SYSGEN or an
        equivalent programme.

If you prefer method two, you must first find the address where
your version of CP/M writes autoload commands that execute
themselves on booting.   This can be done in one of two ways:

    1  By using a byte editor to look directly at the system
    tracks, or

    2  By writing a file of the system code (by SYSGENing to a
    filename) and inspecting that file with DDT or some other
    file tool.

    In either case, what one is looking for is Digital Research
Co's copyright notice, which may be safely overwritten without
affecting the system code.   In the Kaypro computer it is between
addresses 0200 and 0280 (hex of course), on Track 0, Sector 5 (as
counted by DU).   The autoload location starts at the 8th byte
(counting from the first, address ???0) of this particular
128-byte record, i.e. address 0207 for Kaypros.  The command
string starts at the next byte, address 0208.

    If in doubt where the autoboot command is located, reformat a
blank disc and, at the appropriate menu prompt, add a special
string you can recognize, like TARGET.   Then search for it in
the appropriate way, using DU or DDT or whatever tool you wish.  
You should find TARGET immediately preceded by hex byte 06,
indicating its length.

    The command string can theoretically be up to 128 characters
long.  Its first byte is the length (in hex, hence max. FF = 128
decimal) of the command string.   The string may contain ordinary
spaces (hex 20) for example:

			  sub start $f

This is my normal autoload command, used for nearly all discs
with the feature.   On my WordStar disc, the START.SUB file it
reads is:

smartk2 control.ws
b:
;  Enter Date and/or control-Z
pip b:sd.dir=con:
sd $1
ws

What this does, line by line, is:

Load SmartKey2 with keypad macros for WS commands
Log to the B: drive
On-screen message inviting you to
Write (or not) today's date to a
Disc directory in a file on the B: disc
And then start WS

I prefer to write the command string directly on the disc system
tracks, using DU, because I find it easier than DDT, preferred by
Green, see below.   Beginners should probably use COPY or
TURBOCFG to prepare a new disc, to which everything else can be
copied.

Different .SUB files are prepared for different needs.   For
example that for Perfect Filer ends by displaying on screen a
chart of the keypad showing which keys have been assigned to
special functions and which are available for temporary SmartKey2
assignments (since I do not use this programme on a daily basis.)

SUBMIT.COM and EX.COM both execute .SUB files but differently: 
SUBMIT writes a temporary workfile to disc (i.e. cannot be used
from a write-protected disc) and EX uses high memory instead (and
so will not run if SmartKey or other high memory software has
already been loaded.   Although for other purposes I prefer EX I
usually use SUBMIT to run almost every autobooting START.SUB. 

My own system has Advent speed-up and Turbo-ROM kits installed,
which allow me to run almost all programmes (but not P.Filer)
from the B: drive.   (When any programme is invoked, if BIOS
does not find it on the B: disc it automatically looks for it on
the A: drive).   So I usually log automatically to B.   Secondly,
I usually have the numerical keypad configured to the same
numbers, but in the high-bit range of ASCII codes, B0 through BC
(all but the ENTER key).   This provides 13 keys available for
Smartkey definitions, without also reassigning the number and
punctuation keys on the main keyboard.

Many Kaypro owners like to move their reset (cold boot) button
from the back to the front of the computer, so as to allow faster
rebooting and reconfiguration.   Not being an electrician, I use
software instead, viz. a RESET programme (written by Bob Balkwill
of Ottawa about four years ago) of which the Z80 code is:

;	Reset the Kaypro

	org 100h

	ld	hl,reloc
	ld	bc,endrel-reloc
	ld	de,4000h
	ldir
	jp	4000h

reloc:	in	a,(1ch)
	set	7,a
	out	(1ch),a
	jp	0

endrel:	end

If there is room in your disc directories, RESET.COM can be kept
on any disc from which you are likely to want to reboot.

Another document on the "secret" of autoloading utilities on
booting is AUTOGO.TXT by Dave Green, KUAFC, September 1987.   The
only book I know to deal with the topic is Dwyer and
Critchfield's CP/M AND THE PERSONAL COMPUTER (Addison-Wesley,
1983), the best single book on CP/M I know.

		  --Ottawa, 12th March, 1988--
lso reassigning the number and
punctuation keys on the main keyboard.

Many Kaypro owner