	      DISC FORMATS, KAYPRO II AND KAYPRO 4

This documentation concerns chiefly people with old-type Kaypro 4
computers, i.e. double-sided disc drives rather than single-sided
Kaypro IIs, and with no Reverse Video screen display (a feature
of the Kaypro 4s from the middle of l984 onwards.)   The
practical point of difference is as follows:

    --old-type Kaypro IIs can boot up (i.e. start with CP/M code
    from the first disc in the A drive) only from Kaypro II
    (SINGLE-sided) discs.   They cannot even read double-sided
    discs.

    --old-type Kaypro 4s can boot up from EITHER SS or DS discs; 
    they can read from and write to either type, since the disc
    drives reset themselves appropriately on a Warm Boot
    (Control--C).

    --new-model Kaypro IIX, 4E, etc., with Reverse Video, can
    read and write both SS and DS discs but can boot up ONLY from
    their own discs.   This is because CP/M system code (see
    below) for Reverse Video machines is different from system
    code in older machines.   Correspondingly, old Kaypros cannot
    boot up from discs with RV system code, but can read and
    write to them in the B drive.

The outward and obvious differences are, first, between SS (with
191K of available space per disk) and DS machines (390K), and
secondly between DS machines with and without Reverse Video.  
Kaypros with RV all (seem to) have push-button controls instead
of door-latches on their disc drives.   But the difference that
matters is in the "system" code--see below.

The standard disc format in practically all Users' Groups is
Single-Sided Kaypro II, because that is the only disc format
every model of Kaypro can both read and write.   


		       CP/M "SYSTEM" CODE

SYSTEM code is the non-directory code which makes any computer
go.   In all CP/M computers it is written onto its own special
tracks on all disks by the last sequence of the COPY programme.  
It is "non-directory" since this code does not have a filename of
its own, and is not listed when you invoke DIR or any other
screen directory.

(Programmes which do have filenames can be altered by STAT to
"system files" in order to make them "invisible", not appearing
in directories.)

When a Kaypro is first switched on or reset (by the rear-panel
button) it loads into RAM its three operating systems (CCP =
keyboard control, BIOS = screen and port controls, BDOS = disc
control) by reading it off the system or CP/M tracks on the first
disc in the A drive.   There are thus three basically different
types of system code:

    --for single-sided discs (c.f. BDOS) as in the old Kaypro II;

    --for double-sided discs (c.f. BDOS);  if the system lacks
    reverse video as in the old Kaypro 4 its BIOS can be the same
    as above.

    --for DS discs and reverse video (c.f. BIOS) as in the Kaypro
    IIX and 4E.

These systems are "upward compatible":  in general newer
computers (e.g. with reverse video) can run older programmes
(without R.V.) but not vice versa.   The only significant
exceptions are programmes that handle system code, i.e. those
that format and/or copy discs.

Because system code has no filename, a special programme called
SYSGEN is needed to transfer system code from one disc to
another.   It does this by a simple menu, asking you which drive
is to be the source of system code and which is to be the
destination.   It then copies system code onto the appropriate
tracks in the destination disc.

The difference between the three types of system code is both in
its contents and in its spatial layout on disc.   Unsurprisingly,
old Kaypro II CP/M is all on one side, because all disc contents
are on one side.   Kaypro 4 writes on both sides of the disc: 
both CP/M and everything else.


			 PRACTICAL USAGE

In any double-sided machine, when you boot up, if the computer
finds any system code written on both sides of the disc, it
assumes the system is double-sided.   Where novice Kaypro users
usually go wrong is by taking a disc that has once had DS code
written on it and attempting to reformat it for SS use.   The
standard COPY/FORMAT and SYSGEN programmes do not wipe out old
system code on the "other" side of the disc.   So a DS machine
will misidentify old code and read the disc as DS when you
intended it to be SS.

When only SS machines (old Kaypro IIs) were on the market, this
problem did not exist.   The latest DS machines come with special
a special Kaypro programme called MFDISK which does successfully
erase unwanted system code when reformatting.   People with
in-between machines, i.e. double-sided but lacking reverse video,
need to adopt special procedures to use both SS and DS formats.

To avoid delays and difficulties in swapping disc files:

THE SIMPLE WAY is:

	(1)  Use different discs for II (SS DD) and 4 (DS DD).
	Think of Kaypro II (SS) format as something like
        virginity:  once lost never restored, although you can
        always use the same disc in Kaypro 4 (DS).

	(2)  Similarly, do not store any Kaypro II utilities on a
	Kaypro 4 disc until and unless you have verified that
	they will work in that format.   For example FORMAT.COM
	(to format Kaypro II blank discs) works right only
	if it is stored on a Kaypro II formatted disc.   If you
        load it from a Kaypro 4 disc it does not work.

	(3)  Owners of new-model Kaypro 4s (with reverse video)
        have been advised by PROFILES to use Kaypro II discs only
        in the B drive:  they will not boot the computer if used
        in the A drive.   Older model Kaypro 4s boot II and 4
        discs equally well.   (NB:  always reboot (with a Control--C
	or reset button) when you change discs in either drive.)

The Kaypro II programmes needed by a Kaypro 4 or IIX owner for
interchange with model II owners are Kaypro II single-sided
versions of:

		FORMAT.COM
		COPY.COM
		SYSGEN.COM

    BEWARE--although these COPY and SYSGEN utilities have the
    same names as those on your Kaypro 4 CP/M disc, they are
    different.   You can of course rename them as you please,
    e.g. COPY2.COM and SYSGEN2.COM.   The simplest method is
    probably to keep these essential programmes on a Kaypro II
    system disc, together with useful items (e.g. PIP) from your
    Kaypro 4 system disc.

SYSGEN is not a programme you need use routinely.   Its chief use
is not laying CP/M onto a fresh disc (which is done automatically
during formatting or copying) but in transferring your own
custom-configured CP/M from one disc to another (e.g. if you have
used CONFIG to alter the keypad on your word-processing programme
disc.)   It is also used to restore CP/M on a used disc that
refuses, for whatever reason, to boot up.

IN A NUTSHELL:  

(1) keep your backup or master copies of utilities for Kaypro II
uncontaminated by Kaypro 4 material, and vice versa;  and 

(2) bring to every KUG meeting a formatted Kaypro II disc with
the PIP.COM programme and lots of blank space, so that you can
take a copy of everything that is available.

THE ADVANCED WAY:

The special Kaypro programme MFDISK allows you to format new or
used discs for either SS or DS Kaypro machines (and for a dozen
other computers.)   There are several versions of MFDISK:

    MFDISK2 version 2.0 for Kaypro IIs
    MFDISK4 version 2.0 for DS Kaypros lacking reverse video
	    (distributed in Kaypro Users Groups)
    MFDISK version 3.0 for DS Kaypros with reverse video
	    (supplied free with newer Kaypros).   

These programmes are machine-specific and not "upwardly
compatible."   Each will run only on the Kaypro model for which
it was designed.

To reformat a used disc for single-sided use proceed as follows:

1.  With your used disc in the B drive, invoke (your machine-
specific version of) MFDISK from the A drive by keying:

		A>MFDISK	<CR>	  and then		

2.  S to select disc format;
    move pointer arrow (or RV highlight) to Kaypro 4 DS/DD;
    <CR> for go signal and 
    A to set the A drive for Kaypro 4 (which it is already, so #2
may be a complete waste of time;  but it shows you how the
programme operates.)

3.  For the used disc you wish to reformat:
    S to select disc format;
    move arrow (or RV highlight) to Kaypro II SS/DD
    <CR> for go signal and
    B to set the B drive for Kaypro II.

4.  F to lay Kaypro II format on disc in the B drive.

5.  R to exit (return to CP/M).

6.  Your two disc drives remain set the way MFDISK set them, as
the prompts remind you.   (They make a dreadful clatter too:  the
worst operating noise yet in my Kaypro.)  Use the rear reset
button to put things back the way nature (or Mr. Kay) made them.

7.  If discs reformatted thus fail to boot, give them a dose of
Kaypro II SYSGEN, which is quite a simple procedure:

	Boot from your Kaypro II system disc and	
	invoke SYSGEN:  then key
	A for A drive as the source of the SYSGEN you are going
		to copy.   (If it weren't good, the disc in the A
		drive would not have booted up.)
	When the screen prompts you, a <CR> loads CP/M system code 
		from the A drive into RAM.
	B for B drive for the destination.
	<CR> for the go signal.   It takes several seconds to
		write the system code from RAM onto the disc. 

When the screen reports FUNCTION COMPLETE, it also tells you you
can exit (with <CR>) or insert any other discs, in either drive,
onto which you want to copy the same system code.

These steps give you a bootable Kaypro SS disc, even if you had
earlier written Kaypro 4 system code onto both sides.   This
method was successfully field-tested by me in March, 1985, viz.
preparing on my Kaypro 4 used discs to copy the KUTE library on
Mission Control's Kaypro II.

In summary:
	
	1--Kaypro 4 users with older-model machines, lacking the
        Reverse Video feature, may with confidence use MFDISK4
        (Version 2.0) according to the advice above, dated 19
        Jan. l985.

	2--Owners of new Kaypro models IIX, 4E etc., since they
        have Version 3.0 of MFDISK customized to the unique
        hardware of their machines, should be able to use it with
        equal confidence to reformat used discs with Kaypro II
        (single-sided) CP/M.

The various versions of MFDISK identify themselves by number in
the upper right corner of the first screen display.   

The practical difference between MFDISK and COPY is that MFDISK
includes its own system code, for 3 varieties of Kaypro and a
dozen other computers besides, written within the programme.  
COPY does not have system code in its own content, but is set up
to copy system code off its own disk's system tracks.

It is partly for this reason that MFDISK is so bulky.  Version
2.0 occupies 22K of disk space and exists in two different
configurations, MFDISK2 for use on Kaypro II computers (to allow
writing disks in SS formats for Osborne, Morrow, and other
machines) and MFDISK4 for Kaypro 4 machines.   Version 3.0,
requiring Reverse Video, occupies 30K of disc space.   It also
differs from vers. 2.0 by offering a larger menu of alternative
disc formats.   

Neither programme will run on the wrong machine.   (They seem to
hang up in the same way, by looping between the Selection
sub-programme and the Go signal.)

	  Don Phillipson, 19 Jan. 1985, revised 1 Aug. 1985
the first screen display.   
