		       NOTES FOR BEGINNERS

	Congratulations on "going electronic."  If you have any
difficulties with Perfect Writer, don't hesitate to call me.   

	(In choosing between PW and WordStar, I am sure that WS
is better for the typist, making a fair copy of someone else's
finished work, while PW is better for the creative writer, who is
thinking at the keyboard.)

	Don't be intimidated by the amount there is to learn.  
Just jump in and start working on the computer, preferably in PW,
and your immediate needs will shape the curriculum of things you
need to learn as you go along.   

	There are quite a lot of extras you can get from me or
anyone else in the Ottawa Kaypro Group.   I don't want to
thrust them on you before you are ready, but some are described here.

SPECIFICS -- PERFECT WRITER

	The PW manual is one of the best there is (in a field
notorious for its weaknesses).   Only supplementary points are:

1	Its coverage of the INCLUDE function is weak.   The
point is that, when files get longer than about 15 or 20
Kilobytes (say a dozen pages) it takes an inconveniently long
time to load them into memory or write them to disc.

	a)  Since PW allows you to switch instantaneously between
	several "buffers" each holding a different file
	simultaneously in RAM (working memory), you might as well
	keep them of convenient size.

	b)  When you want to print a long continuous document, it
	is easy to do so by creating a "batch" file, with contents
		
		INCLUDE{B:FILE.1}
		INCLUDE{B:FILE.2}
		INCLUDE{B:FILE.3}
		INCLUDE{B:FILE.4}
	
	There are some fancier things you can add for formatting
and printing.   You'll learn them best by figuring them out for
yourself, but ask me if you get stuck.

2	What version of PW do you have?   The earliest versions
had a bug in them requiring a double @W[@@] formatting marker.

3	The important omission in the manual is the WRITE REGION
function, by C--X R:
	1--To copy any extract from a file into a separate file
	on its own, first SET MARK by putting the cursor at the
	beginning and keying ESC and SPACEBAR (sequentially).
	2--Move the cursor to the end of the region and key:
	Control--X (simultaneously) and then R.
	3--You'll see on the bottom line a prompt:
	WRITE REGION TO FILE<CR>:
	You just key in a filename, e.g. B:NOTE.1 and <CR>.  The
	programme then writes the extract to a separate file on
	its own, leaving the source file (on your screen) untouched.

4	The LESSONS DISC has some excellent programmed-learning
tutorials on PW which you should look through.   If you don't
have them, let me know.

	There are 8 lessons, numbered LESSON0 to LESSON7 --
presumably someone added an introductory one on concluding that
LESSON1 was not a good enough introduction.   Beware surprises:

	In LESSON1 line 38, you must indicate which drive (B:) or
	else you'll produce a new file (with nothing in it) from
	the A drive, and perhaps not know what to do about it.   
	This is a typo mistake in the programme.   I suggest you
	alter it on your working copy of the Lessons Disc.

	In LESSON2, at line 173, the command to go to the left
	end of the line is C--A (not C--P).

	After LESSON5, better sign out with C--X, C--C (and "Yes"
	to the prompt question about Abandoning Modified Buffers) 
	or you might write to disc the shuffling about you have
	been doing.   (The lesson text suggests you go straight to 
	LESSON6.)

5	The (documented) commands SET INDENT COLUMN and SET FILL
COLUMN would be more clearly named SET LEFT MARGIN and SET RIGHT
MARGIN.   They are not because they govern screen display, and
"margin" is a word usually reserved for printing on paper.   But,
on the screen, that is the function of those two commands.

6	Sooner or later, you'll need to learn at least a little
about the CP/M operating system of the Kaypro (i.e. the frame
within which Perfect Writer and DBase II and MBASIC and all the
other programmes operate.)

	The official Microsoft Corp. manual is a reliable
        reference but not a tutorial:  incomprehensible to the
        beginner, but don't let this worry you.

	There is an excellent (and undocumented) tutorial on this
        subject on the PW Lessons Disc called KAYPRO.LRN, adapted
        by me as the basis of a summary of CP/M.

	If you want to buy a special book, the OSBORNE USERS'
        GUIDE TO CP/M by Tom Hogan is about unbeatable.

7	But your best all-around source is the local Kaypro
Users' Group, a genial bunch which between them disposes of vast
stores of technical know-how, available as-and-when:  everything
from writing "utilities" (housekeeping programmes) to order to
telling you how to use Perfect Filer (good programme, appalling
manual) or do fancy printing.

	Meets 8 p.m., first Thursday of the month, Room 462 of
St. Patrick's College, Carleton (just where Maggie McCoy changes
buses to go to OCS board meetings!)   Bring a couple of empty
formatted discs, to copy bulletins and software.

	The group has also obtained from the Toronto Kaypro Group
its library of 40 discs of software, stored at the Mission
Control store (Center St., near Montreal Rd. and St. Laurent)
where members can copy anything they like for a one-shot token
fee of $10.   There is lots of good stuff here, ranging from
games to advanced tips on Perfect Writer.

8	UTILITIES:  As soon as you feel ready (must avoid
information overload!) you should acquire copies of at least some
of the following:

UNERASE.COM	To restore files erased by accident
FINDBAD.COM	To blank off "bad sectors" or doubtful areas of
		worn discs:  rarely really needed, but an
		important confidence-booster! 	
SNAPSHOT.COM	Instant printout of screen display
BASIC.DOC	About BASIC languages and games on BASIC disc
KEYCODE.PW	Inventory of all PW keystroke commands
NEWSWAP.COM	To make new larger or smaller PW.SWP files (useful
		in large printing jobs--an advanced function)
NULU.COM	Library utility to make/unmake file libraries
QL.COM		Automatic "de-library" and "uncondense" utility
VF.COM		Like SWEEP:  the "file-handler" most of us use
PWRESET.DOC	)  
PWRESET.HEX	)  See below
Games for your kids, e.g. ADVENTURE
			  OTHELLO
If you don't have one already, you'll find it a great convenience
to get SMARTKEY or PLUPERFECT or some other programme which
allows you to set unused keys (e.g. keypad) to do multiple-key
commands at a single stroke.

9	COMMUNICATION BY MODEM

	Don't feel rushed, but once you've got the feel of your
Kaypro you ought to connect your modem to the telephone (if Gary
Stanoulis has not already done it for you) and go "on line."   

	There are literally dozens of "bulletin boards"
(automatically-responding computers) in Ottawa--mostly garbage,
but a few of them good, and many fun to explore.   Even at the
slow speed of 300 Baud, it's a great convenience too to get
wanted information and programmes off the telephone line, rather
than wait until the next meeting or travel in person.

	In the Kaypro Users' Group, half a dozen or more people
use modems, and would be happy to help you get started, give you
appropriate software, etc.   The two best alternatives are MITE
and MEX, both in pretty common circulation.


DISASTERS--LOSS OF DATA

	Accidental loss of data is usually what beginners fear
most--and, sooner or later, everyone will make the wrong
keystroke and lose something.   NB--this is a strong reason for
choosing Perfect Writer:  it has an "Oops" or YANKBACK function,
to restore whatever was last erased.   WordStar does not have this.

	Practical procedures to avoid inconvenient accidents are
as follows:

	1	Never switch on or off with a disc in either
        drive:  stray electric signals can alter it.

        2	Whenever you put a new disc into the computer, be
        sure either to reset (by push-button on rear) or Warm
        Boot (by C--C):  but remember that if you do this within
	a working programme, it might clear RAM (volatile
	memory), so if you have finished work in RAM you should 
	first write it to disc.
		PW can be altered by a "patch" to obviate this:
	see #7 below.

        3	Back up (i.e. make a duplicate copy) your data
	(working) discs often, at least once a week if not daily.

	4	Get a copy of UNERASE.COM and keep it handy.

	5	Get the habit of saving your work to disc
	whenever you pause for thought.

	6	If actually needed, I can provide an "UNSWAP"
        programme which actually prints out the contents of the
        swap file, to allow reconstruction of a lost text:  an
        extreme measure (used by me twice in 16 months) but
	reassuring.

	7	Alter your PW EDIT disc with the PWRESET "patch"
        so that you can put a new empty disc into the computer
        whenever you like, without checking out of PW.   This
        would lose into the ether whatever finished work you have
        in RAM, if there was not enough empty space on your discs
        to save it.

		The inventors of PW simply did not anticipate the
        need for this function (until version 2.0, 1984, probably
        not worth the extra $100 it costs).   However, artful
        "hackers" have devised the PWRESET patch which allows you
        to alter the PW.COM programme appropriately.   It works
        by reassigning the Perfect Speller main command (C--X S)
        to reset the discs, without losing RAM:  so you can put
        in an empty (formatted) disc, reset, and write onto the
        disc whatever you have been working on.

		Perfect Speller is no loss since it is a rotten
        programme--and you should also have The Word Plus, a far
        superior spelling checker.

		Executing the PWRESET patch is simply a matter of
        following instructions and copying about 10 coded
        instructions.   I'll do it for you if you are hesitant,
        but there is no reason why you shouldn't get the
        necessary programme and instructions--over your modem if
        you like--and do it yourselves.   It feels good when you
        have the self-confidence to alter and customize your own
        programmes!

		(I now have all my 3 or 4 copies of PW EDIT thus
        customized;  forgetting one of them was not, and getting
        caught, was the reason I last needed to use UNSWAP!)

		      Don Phillipson, 15 Feb. 1985



 S)
        