                       TIPS ON USING PERFECT SOFTWARE

1       Running Off the 'B' Drive
2       Configuring the Console Device for Perfect Formatter
3	PW "Environments" for Numbered or Multiple Paragraphs 
4	Search functions ^S ^R and ESC R
5	Bugs in PW programmes
6	New Kaypro/PW documentation on disc

1       RUNNING OFF THE 'B' DRIVE

To avoid inadvertently trying to write a file to a nearly full
disc in the A drive, log to B drive:

			       B:

and proceed with:	B> A:MENU

            You are now logged to drive 'B', but operating with a
program in drive 'A'. This eliminates the need for the disc drive
designation in front of filenames, thereby elimiating accidental
write operations to the 'A' drive.   This will work with every
Perfect Software program EXCEPT PERFECT FILER.   This program
automatically transfers from drive to drive as necessary. 

SUPPLEMENTARY Notes (added later by DJCP)

	A.   Logging to the B drive in Perfect Writer is an
        adaptation to the developing bad habit of forgetting to
        specify the drive-name (A or B) when writing to a file: 
        it would be far better to acquire the right habit.

	B.   The problem of attempting to write from RAM to a
        nearly full disc (with the risk of losing finished work
        in RAM) is solved by the PWRESET function invented by
        Peter Brawley.   See PWRESET.DOC.   This is an important
        improvement in Perfect Writer prior to version 2.0.

	C.   When using the Installation Disc to configure PF.DAT
        (e.g. as in item 2 below) it is convenient to log to the
        A drive (so that PWCONFIG.COM works on the version of
        PF.DAT on your Edit disc in the A drive rather than the
        spare copy of PF.DAT on the Installation Disc itself.)   

	     If you log to the B drive for such work, you have to
        erase the A drive's PF.DAT and PIP the new version across
        from the B drive--wasted effort.   Some users suggest
        either erasing PF.DAT from the Installation Disc or
        renaming it PFDAT.BAK to avoid confusion.


2       CONFIGURING THE CONSOLE DEVICE FOR PERFECT FORMATTER

        Perfect Writer will let you preview a formatted document
on the screen before it is printed.  When formatting a document
simply select option 'C' of the formatting menu--"Send the output
to the Console Device" (CP/M's clumsy name for the video screen.) 

	This feature works by having the CONSOLE included in
PF.DAT as one of the pre-configured varieties of printer.  
(Another such dummy definition is FILE, which writes onto disc a
fully-formatted .FIN file that you can edit in Perfect Writer,
but not print in PP, although it can be printed with CP/M's TYPE
command.   This is the only .FIN file you can reach in PW.)

	For no cogent reason, the pseudo-printer definition of
"Console Device" is preset for pages of only 4 to 6 lines in
length.   Before the screen can show type layout as it would
appear on paper, the Console Device must be configured by
PFCONFIG to match your printer's characteristics.

	Once this is done, selecting C for Console in the PF Menu
(and G for Go, of course) will present your formatted document,
scrolling up the screen, showing the true number of characters
per line you will obtain when printing the formatted file on
paper.   You can stop the scrolling whenever you like by keying
Control--S, and restart it with any other key.

	TO RECONFIGURE THE CONSOLE DEFINITION, work from a backup
or duplicate copy of your Perfect Writer Edit disc. 

	1.  Place your Edit disc in drive 'A' and your
        Installation disc in drive 'B'.

        2.  Reset or Warm Boot to initialize both discs. 

        3.  Type the following:
			       B:PFCONFIG
        <and a RETURN, of course, here and everywhere else needed.>

        This invokes (i.e. loads into RAM memory) the program
        called PFCONFIG.COM, from the Installation disc in the B
        drive, in order to alter the 'PF.DAT' file on your Edit
        disc in the A drive.

        4.  The screen will fill with information and ask if you
        want to insert different discs.   Providing you have
        followed the procedure above, answer N for No.   There is
        another screen of information before we reach:

	5.  The PFCONFIG menu for action.   Option 1 shows you
        the list of all printers already configured.   We assume
        your printer is already configured and thus shown here.  
        Note its precise name.

	6.  Control--G takes you back to the PFCONFIG menu.  
        Then select Option 5 to choose the default printer
        settings.   ("Default" is computer jargon for whatever
        option any system is preset to choose when not specially
        instructed:  perhaps an ill-chosen word, but you'll get
        used to it.   See note # below.)

	7.  Option 5 shows you what the default settings are for
        both printer and console and allows you to reset them.   
        Chances are that the device name specified for console
        output is 'Console', i.e. the short-page definition
        mentioned above.   Enter the name of your printer (from
        step 5 above) for BOTH printer and console, each with
        <RETURN>.

	8.   Return to the main menu and select Option 6 to
        complete the process.   (This last step reads your
        alterations out of the electronic memory and writes them
        into the file PF.DAT on your Edit disc.)

	Once this is done, test it by using the Perfect Formatter
(options C and G) to display on the console one of your text
files.   To stop it scrolling, key Control--S as convenient.

	If you notice the lines of your file are displayed as a
full line of print followed by a shorter line starting at the
extreme left of the screen, then another full line and so on, you
are observing your KayPro's method of displaying lines longer
than the "default" screen setting.   While looking somewhat
strange this does, hoever, accurately show which characters
will print as one line and where the page breaks come. 

        #    The point is that you can use for formatting any of
        the printers defined in PF.DAT, by  specifying your
        choice by name, under option D = Device of the PF menu.  
        90 to 99 per cent of the time, when you do not need to
        specify a special printer definition, PF uses its default
        setting automatically, without needing to be told.
	
             This feature comes in handy if, for example, you
        have needed to use character translation tables for
        special purposes.   

             My own printer translates the screen's * symbol into
        an English pound sign, while showing the * on the screen
        (since Kaypro does not have the English pound sign
        although my printer does.)   The default setting for my
        printer is a definition (named Sterling) which includes
        this translation.   Once in a while, I need to print the
        asterisk.   I have another printer definition, named
        Spirit, identical with Sterling except that it does not
        use character translation (i.e. prints on paper only
        Kaypro characters, without the pound sign.)   

             As the default setting, which suits 90 per cent of
        my work, PF.DAT automatically chooses Sterling when not
        told otherwise.   When I need the asterisk, Option D =
        Device of the PF menu allows me to specify the Spirit
        printer definition.


3	PW "ENVIRONMENTS" FOR NUMBERED OR MULTIPLE PARAGRAPHS 

        Perfect Writer offers you a number of ways to
automatically number, list or otherwise offset portions of your
text by paragraph.   These commands include 'ENUMERATE',
'ITEMIZE', 'LEVEL', 'DESCRIPTION' and others.   A potential
problem presents itself when one wishes to have more than one
paragraph under a single delineation since the start of a new
paragraph ordinarily informs Perfect Writer it should treat the
following text as a new item. 

	In an environment which numbers paragraphs, such as
level, each new paragraph gets a new number.  But a second
unnumbered paragraph can be enforced by use of the command
BLANKSPACE[1 LINE] instead of paragraph spacing.


4	SEARCH FUNCTIONS

	Perfect Writer version 1.03 SEARCH functions require at
least two characters to work on:  a single character is not
enough.   In PW 1.20 ^S and ESC R will work for one character
(i.e. forwards only):  ^R requires at least two-character
targets.


5	BUGS IN EARLY VERSIONS OF PW

	"We rely on you the user for the Ultimate Testing of the
product," said the original version of this document by Perfect
Writer, admitting there were lots of bugs in early versions.  
(Perfect Writer is an adaptation of a big main-frame word
processor written at MIT in the early 1970s.   Besides simple
oversights and users' needs Perfect Software had failed to
anticipate, it was constrained by the small capacity of
single-sided disc drives, the only type available when the
microcomputer version was first written.)
 
	If for whatever reason you have any version of PW prior
to version 2.0, be alert for malfunctions in:

	PW's KILL SENTENCE Command (Escape. . .K) which sometimes
        couldn't find the end of the sentence.

	PW's WRITE REGION command (C--X  R)--undocumented
        although highly valuable.

	Version 1.0 of Perfect Calc had a "dynamic" SWAP file,
        created as needed, but there was not enough room on the
        disc for it to grow as needed.   Version 1.05 uses a
        static 65K 'swap' file' which eliminates this problem. 

        However this had its own bugs, requiring replacement by
        PC vers. 1.10.

        Perfect Filer version 1.2 CREATE and MOVE programs have
        undocumented problems--allegedly debugged in later
        versions by (1) a standard default list format and (2)
        do-it-yourself distinct names for each database. 

The company promised to exchange discs and provide its new
tutorials on disc through dealers at a charge of $5 a disc, or by
mail from its Product Science Center, P.O. Box 1479,Eugene,
Oregon, 97440.


6	NEW DOCUMENTATION ON DISC

	In 1983 this consisted of three main files, each with a
different emphasis, prepared by Perfect Software especially for
the Kaypro package.  'KAYPRO.MSS' is a short introductory
pamphlet that identifies the files of the Perfect Software
programs, indicating what they do and how to arrange them on your
diskettes.  

        'KAYPRO2.LRN' is a tutorial in CP/M functions and terms,
an enhanced edition of the file called 'KAYPRO.LRN' on early
Perfect Writer Lessons discs.  

	'BATCH.MSS' describes how to format and print numerous
files while maintaining consecutive 'counters' such as chapter,
page, section, etc. 

		   Perfect Software, Inc. 1983
	      (Rewritten by DJCP, 1st April, l985)















































                                    - 7 -
       





 dealers at a charge of $5 a disc, or by
mail from its Product Science Center, P.O. Box 1479,Eugene,
Oregon, 97440.


6	